Foreword

The project management profession has always evolved with innovation and technological
progress. We’ve been through the Technological Age, the Computer Age. And now, we live
in the “Exponential Age”—a time when disruptive technologies, innovations, and new ways
of thinking and working are iterating exponentially.
There have been several hallmarks of this age. The advent of the internet changed the way
we learn about and see the world. Social media changed the way we connect with one
another. Mobile devices, widespread Wi-Fi, augmented and virtual reality, and new frontiers
in microprocessing continue to close the gap between humans and machines.
And now, artificial intelligence is reaching an inflection point. What was once a niche tool
leveraged by only the most technologically savvy among us has entered the mainstream.
Massive investments by huge tech companies are taking AI from the margins to the main
stage. AI is rocking every industry and every profession—from IT to the creative arts to
manufacturing and, yes, to project management.
AI affects us all. It impacts our jobs, our lives, and our prospects. The AI revolution is both a
threat and an opportunity, and our profession needs to be on the winning side. It is up to us
to stand up and take charge of our own futures.
At PMI, this is the choice we made. We chose to lead the AI transformation of project
management and empower project professionals to lead the AI transformations of their
own organizations.
Hence, PMI is sharing our new AI Essentials for Project Professionals guide. Within these
pages, you will learn the fundamentals of AI, the building blocks for a robust understanding
of this powerful and disruptive new technology.
What is AI and how does it work? What are the key applications of AI? What terms do I
need to know? How can I best use AI to communicate, coordinate, decide, and excel?
These lessons have been developed and vetted by a global community of experts and
experienced practitioners who are applying their vast knowledge to benefit the project
management profession. They answer the critical questions that will equip you to learn,
grow, and lead as you leverage the latest AI platforms and tools.
Think of this guide as an “AI 101” for project managers and then leverage other PMI
resources—our online courses, our thought leadership reports, and our PMI Infinity™ AI
copilot—to take your AI experience to the next level.
Now is the time to take charge. Learn. Grow. Lead.
PMI is here to guide and support you along
your journey.
Pierre Le Manh, PMP
President and CEO, PMI

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

i

Introduction

The advent of AI, and most recently, the use of generative AI (GenAI) applications, is
ushering in an era of unprecedented change, often referred to as the Exponential Age. It is
increasing the technological change rate and resolving the workforce issues produced by
those advancements. This transformation brings with it a myriad of unknowns and
challenges, and project professionals are poised to play a pivotal role as both
organizational leaders and agents of change.
How the project practitioner works—and the tools they work with—will change in this
Exponential Age. With the advent of AI, professionals will recast how they perform their
jobs and help their organizations navigate change in their respective functional areas.
This guide intends to provide a broad, general view for understanding AI from the context
of the project professional, and some key uses of AI that are applicable to their daily tasks.
A companion guide will explore other facets of AI to help project practitioners solve
challenges they face in their roles and with the organizational adoption of AI.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

ii

Table of Contents

What Is AI?....................................................................................................................................................................... 1
Key Elements of AI................................................................................................................................................. 2
Types of AI................................................................................................................................................................. 2
		

AI Focused on Narrow Versus General Applications................................................................... 2

		

Technology Underpinnings of AI........................................................................................................... 2

Applications of AI....................................................................................................................................................6
		

Goals of AI in the Exponential Age....................................................................................................... 7

		

AI Patterns.........................................................................................................................................................8

		

Utilizing the Seven Patterns for AI Project Success...................................................................10

Categories of AI..................................................................................................................................................... 11
		

Generative AI................................................................................................................................................. 11

		

Predictive AI................................................................................................................................................... 17

Applying AI in Project Management...............................................................................................................19
The Role of Project Professionals in AI Projects...................................................................................19
How Can AI Best Enhance Project Management?...............................................................................21
		

AI in Project Management Planning.................................................................................................. 22

		

AI in Decision-Making.............................................................................................................................. 24

		

AI in Project Monitoring........................................................................................................................... 25

		

AI in Communication and Collaboration......................................................................................... 26

		

AI in Document Management.............................................................................................................. 27

		

AI in Cost Management.......................................................................................................................... 27

		

AI in Training and Development.......................................................................................................... 29

Getting the Most From AI................................................................................................................................ 29
		

As a Project Professional........................................................................................................................ 29

		

As an Organization....................................................................................................................................30

		

Risks of AI in Project Management....................................................................................................34

Emerging AI Regulations and Laws.............................................................................................................41
AI Resources..........................................................................................................................................................44
		

PMI Infinity™..................................................................................................................................................45

		

PMI Resources.............................................................................................................................................45

Taking the Next Steps With AI......................................................................................................................46
Further AI Guidance...........................................................................................................................................46
References.............................................................................................................................................................. 47
Contributors and Reviewers ..........................................................................................................................48

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

iii

What Is AI?

Improvements in information technology have had a profound impact on the modern
workforce. The job description of a salesperson, accountant, or project manager has not
changed much from when Gordon E. Moore, cofounder of Intel, first observed that
computing technology would roughly double in speed and capability for the same cost
every 18 months. 1 However, the performance of those jobs has changed significantly and
will continue to do so. The modern worker has a need to:
•

Manage greater amounts of quickly evolving data and information;

•

Have a greater level of productivity and ROI; and

•

Extract greater value from the vast amounts of data being created.

Artificial intelligence (AI), the notion of machines that can be imbued with the same
cognitive abilities as people, is one solution to the issues listed above.
The idea of thinking machines has been with us since the early 1900s. The term artificial
intelligence was first used by John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester, and
Claude Shannon in 1955 to propose the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial
Intelligence. They described the original concept of AI as “every aspect of learning or any
other feature of intelligence can in principle be so precisely described that a machine can
be made to simulate it.” 2
While the Dartmouth conference aimed to define artificial intelligence, there is currently no
commonly and widely accepted definition of AI. As such, from that 10-day gathering and its
original definition, the definition of AI has expanded to encompass a variety of concepts
around intelligent machines. We are now in a moment when the reality of AI is closer than
ever to the world’s potential for it.
As our technological capabilities increase, AI’s scope will also increase. This broad scope
and constantly evolving capability have made providing a standard definition of AI difficult.
For this guide’s purposes, we will define AI as a machine behavior and function that
exhibits human intelligence and behavior. We can more narrowly define AI as the ability
of machines to:
•

Perceive and understand their surroundings;

•

Learn from teaching, training, and its own experiences;

•

Make decisions based on stored memories and thought processes;

•

Have natural conversations and linguistic communication with humans; and

•

Develop “intuition” in situations that are vague and imprecise.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

1

Key Elements of AI
There are three key elements of AI: perception,
prediction, and planning.
•

Perception. The ability to understand the
environment and process the data that the
environment provides.

•

Prediction. Enabling a machine to recognize
patterns and use that recognition to predict
future events. The AI’s overall performance can
be improved by continuously observing
iterations within the patterns—and learning
from those iterations.

•

Planning. Use what was perceived and the
lessons from pattern observation to make
decisions and develop plans.

For the project professional, these elements will
change the various aspects of project
management, including planning, determining
outcomes for success, monitoring, and allocating
resources.

Types of AI
AI can be categorized by its application and the
underlying technology it uses.

AI Focused on Narrow Versus
General Applications
There are two types of AI based on capabilities:
narrow or weak AI and general or strong AI
(sometimes called artificial general intelligence
[AGI]).

Narrow AI
Narrow AI systems are designed to use various AI
technologies to perform specific tasks such as
conversational chatbots, predictive analytics,
repetitive tasks, or facial recognition. Because their
scope is limited, these systems are not meant—or
able—to be applied to other tasks. All current
implementations of AI in use today fall under the
narrow AI type.

For project professionals, processes such as
planning, cost management, project monitoring,
and communication can all be enhanced and
made more efficient through the implementation of
an AI system.

Artificial General Intelligence
This type of AI is enabled with cognitive
capabilities and mental dexterity that mimic those
attributes in humans. These systems could
generalize knowledge across domains, plan for
future events based on their knowledge and
experience, and adapt to changes. We have yet to
build anything close to the capabilities of artificial
general intelligence systems.

For project professionals,
processes such as planning,
cost management, project
monitoring, and
communication can all be
enhanced and made more
efficient through the
implementation of an
AI system.

Technology Underpinnings of AI
For AI systems to provide the capabilities of the
key elements of AI, we utilize a variety of
technologies relevant to the task they are required
to perform.

Machine Learning
The ability to learn is key to exhibiting intelligence.
Machine learning (ML) is the set of methods and
processes that enable computer systems to learn
patterns. These patterns come from stored data
and are analyzed using different formulas called
ML algorithms. The algorithms encode learning
from training data into ML models, representing
what the machine has learned from the data for a
particular task.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

2

There are various methods to enable a machine to learn:
•

Supervised learning. Algorithms can learn by being trained from examples of data.
Email filtering is a good example of supervised learning. The ML algorithm is trained with
a data set containing both spam and legitimate email. The algorithm learns patterns to
distinguish between spam and legitimate email using the email metadata, sender,
subject, body, and other components. Once trained, it can be implemented in an email
app to filter spam emails.

•

Unsupervised learning. Algorithms are provided with unlabeled data, and hidden
patterns or data groupings are discovered without human intervention. Image and video
analysis is an example of unsupervised learning.

•

Reinforcement learning. Machines can also learn through trial-and-error approaches.
Autonomous driving algorithms use reinforcement learning to improve their capabilities.

Neural Networks
Our brains use neurons to connect the inputs from our senses and what we’ve learned.
These connections enable humans to learn new skills based on their existing skill sets.
Following this neural model, AI researchers created an ML algorithm called neural networks
that can simulate how the brain works to encode learning.
With neural networks, machines learn using a set of connected artificial neurons; they input
information, analyze it, and produce an output. Over time these networks quickly learn
patterns.

Deep Learning
One of the challenges with neural networks is that they require a lot of data and computing
to work efficiently. The more neural layers in the network, the more efficient and powerful it
can be. The trade-off for this increase is that the network becomes challenging to manage
and difficult to scale.
With the advent of big data and specialized graphics processing units (GPUs), we can
create neural networks with many layers of artificial neurons to enable more complicated
learning. This use of many layers of interconnected artificial neurons in a neural network is
known as deep learning. Its name comes from the many artificial neuron layers. Deep
learning neural network approaches to ML have proven successful at recognizing images,
natural language processing (NLP), and other applications (see Figure 1).

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

3

Neural Network

Input
Layer

Hidden
Layer

Deep Learning Neural Network

Output
Layer

Input
Layer

Hidden
Layers

Output
Layer
Source: Cognilytica

Figure 1. Neural Networks and Deep Learning

Natural Language Processing and
Generation
The advancement of deep learning and other
approaches to ML have furthered our
understanding and processing of speech and
natural language. The result is a wide range of NLP
applications that can unlock the power of spoken
conversation and the written word. These
applications not only can understand spoken and
written words, but can also formulate those words
into sentences and summarize volumes of content.
Natural language generation (NLG) allows
computers to communicate with humans in a
conversational flow.
Applying NLP and NLG can enable the
communication capabilities of chatbots,
conversational interfaces, and a wide range of
applications, which can unlock the power of
unstructured information and spoken content in
unprecedented ways.

Computer Vision
Computers have long had the capability to capture
and store images and visual information. However,

the challenge of being able to identify what is in
those images is particularly complicated. The brain
has a whole area of interconnected neurons and
biochemical pathways dedicated to decoding the
meaning of the electrical impulses from the retina,
where humans perceive light and images. For a
long time, getting accurate image recognition was
a computationally difficult task. Developers and
researchers found it challenging to program a way
to classify images or identify faces in different
positions, lighting situations, and expressions.
Then, deep learning came and changed
everything.

The use cases for computer
vision capabilities are
enormous, ranging from
reducing costs and ensuring
accuracy in construction
and renovation projects to
managing project assets.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

4

Using deep learning neural networks with large quantities of training data gives new
meaning to computer vision, allowing systems to accurately identify and classify images,
recognize faces, and detect specific objects inside images or videos. The use cases for
computer vision capabilities are enormous, ranging from reducing costs and ensuring
accuracy in construction and renovation projects to managing project assets.

Augmented Intelligence
Augmented Intelligence is the idea of machines and humans working together to enhance,
rather than replace, humans for tasks. The term augmented intelligence provides a way to
differentiate the goals of helping humans with AI technology from those AI approaches
meant to operate independently of humans.
This approach is about enhancing the quality and scope of project management tasks,
enabling managers to tackle more intricate challenges that require a deep understanding
of business dynamics and project interdependencies. By utilizing augmented intelligence,
businesses and organizations can do more with the people they already have. Consider
augmented intelligence as assistive devices that can help humans perform tasks that
might have previously been too difficult, dangerous, expensive, or tedious.
By combining AI’s efficiency, scalability, and data-processing capabilities with the
creativity, emotional intelligence, and ethical judgment of human professionals,
organizations can create exceptional and human-centric customer experiences that
resonate with their customers on a deeper level (see Table 1).

Table 1. Augmented Intelligence ——The Balance Between Humans and Machines

Strengths

Humans

Machines

• Intuition

• Probabilistic thinking

• Emotional intelligence

• Dealing with large volumes
of information

• Common sense

• Trainability and following 		
instructions

• Creativity
• Learning adaptability

Weaknesses

• Lack of selfish motivations

• Probabilistic thinking

• Intuition

• Dealing with large volumes
of information

• Emotional intelligence

• Bias

• Creativity

• Responding reliably to training
and instructions

• Bias

• Common sense

• Hard to adapt learning to
different situations
• Dependence on quality of
training data

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

5

Automation Versus Intelligence
Missing from the above technologies is automation. Automation does not equal
intelligence. Automation is the act of repetition. It does not require intelligence and is
mostly focused on handling the same inputs and producing the same outputs. Intelligence,
on the other hand, is about handling variability.
We defined artificial intelligence as having three aspects: the ability to perceive, predict,
and plan. An automated system does none of these; it simply follows the coded
instructions given to it.
As an example, a company has an automated system that categorizes incoming customer
issues. Based on keywords within the issue submission, the customer is either directed to a
live customer support person or flagged for an automated email response. The automated
response does not immediately resolve the customer issue but simply provides instructions
on how to escalate the issue. This response system is automated but not intelligent.
Without adding additional human resources, management wants to find a means to resolve
all customer issues within a shorter timeframe and without escalation. This requires
introducing a level of intelligence into the existing system so issues not routed to a live
support person can be resolved. By implementing an AI system, specifically NLP, the issue
can be interpreted and a solution implemented.
To determine if a system is automated or intelligent, ask these questions:
•

Is there any machine learning in the system?

•

Can the system improve over time and with experience?

•

Can the system determine the next steps and avoid exceptions without human
intervention?

If not, the system is not intelligent.

Applications of AI
Having a broad understanding of how AI
functions can be helpful, but for project
professionals to capitalize on the benefits of
AI it’s important to have an overview of how it
can be applied. These applications, called
patterns, broadly define how AI can be used
for project management tasks. Understanding
them can help lead to greater efficiency and
improved results when utilizing AI.

... for project professionals
to capitalize on the benefits
of AI it’s important to have
an overview of how it can
be applied.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

6

Goals of AI in the Exponential Age
A technology or product’s goals are typically determined by the intended audience’s
needs. The intended audience of AI is humanity itself, which can create a large set of
potential goals. As AI has evolved, the community behind its growth and its end users have
helped to define the goals. We look to AI to solve problems, automate tasks, and augment
human shortcomings. A short but not exclusive list of AI goals is to:
•

Solve complex problems;

•

Automate and streamline operations with intelligent capabilities;

•

Utilize data and intelligence continuous improvement;

•

Interact with people using natural language conversation;

•

Replicate human expertise; and

•

Foster human–AI collaboration.

AI is not a new technology. The concept has
been around since the early 1900s and
different types of AI have been implemented
since the 1960s. It has always been restrained
by limited computational power and storage.
Enter Moore’s Law. As we began this century,
we saw vast improvements in computing
power and data storage, sometimes
surpassing our current needs.

Artificial intelligence can help
by providing a combination of
intelligence, automation,
creation, and prediction to
make our lives easier and
more fulfilled.

As the saying goes, solve a problem, create a
problem. As computing power and data storage have increased, so have our technology
demands. Customers expect near-instantaneous results, from next-day delivery of a
product ordered online to immediate retrieval of bank statements. Businesses are awash in
data that can only be useful if correctly analyzed, displayed, and integrated into their
strategies. Corporations want workers to be more productive and achieve company goals
on faster timelines. Researchers need assistance interpreting their discoveries as we delve
further into the cosmos and the quantum. People want entertainment and news tailored to
their likes; to connect through video with friends, family, and coworkers; directions to their
destinations mapped; and so much more from this Exponential Age.
Artificial intelligence can help address these needs by providing a combination of
intelligence, automation, creation, and prediction to make our lives easier and more fulfilled.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

7

AI Patterns
Not all applications of AI are the same. In fact, there are seven primary ways in which AI
systems are applied to the various application areas to solve the above challenges. From
automated driving to facial recognition to data analytics, each AI project, at its core, can fit
into an AI pattern. In 2019, researchers from Cognilytica categorized AI projects into seven
specific patterns 3 (see Figure 2).

Recognition

Predictive
Analytics and
Directions

Autonomous
Systems

The Seven
Patterns
of AI

Patterns
and Anomalies

Conversation
and Human
Interaction

Goal-Driven
Systems
HyperPersonalization

Source: Cognilytica

Figure 2. The Seven Patterns of AI

Autonomous Systems
Autonomous systems are physical and virtual software and hardware systems that can
accomplish a task, reach a goal, interact with their surroundings, and achieve an objective
with minimal human involvement. The goal of autonomous systems is to streamline
processes with as little human interaction as possible. The autonomous system pattern
requires ML capability that can independently perceive the outside world, predict future
behavior of external elements, and plan how to deal with those changes.
Obvious applications of this pattern include autonomous machines and vehicles of all sorts,
including cars, boats, trains, and airplanes. However, this pattern also includes autonomous
systems like autonomous documentation and knowledge generation and autonomous
business processes. These include systems that can operate near to how humans behave,
including preferential decision-making.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

8

Conversation and Human Interaction
The conversational/human interaction pattern is
defined as machines and humans interacting in
conversational ways. The interactive content can
be created in various formats such as voice, text,
and image. The pattern includes machine to
human, human to machine, and human and
machine. It can also be used to facilitate humanto-human interaction through translation features.
This pattern enables machines to interact with
humans the same way they interact with one
another.
Examples of this pattern include chatbots; voice
assistants; and sentiment, mood, and intent
analysis. The objective is to understand the intent
behind human interactions. Many businesses
employ a chatbot on their website to engage
customers as a frontline customer service option
and to reduce customer support costs.

Goal-Driven Systems
Machines have proven particularly adept at
learning game rules and beating human players.
The key to this success is to provide the AI system
with a goal or objective to achieve. Through the
power of reinforcement learning and much more
advanced computation capabilities, machines have
learned and won games such as chess, checkers,
and go; multiplayer games such as Defense of the
Ancients (Dota); and more complicated games.
The goal-driven system pattern works under the
theory that computers can learn anything through
goals. Examples of the pattern can include game
playing, resource optimization, iterative problemsolving, and bidding and real-time auctions.

With the power of goal-driven patterns,
organizations can enable their systems to find,
through trial and error, the optimal solution to a
problem. In 2022, scientists at Google’s DeepMind
division created AlphaFold, an AI system that can
predict how every known protein can be folded
into its three-dimensional (3D) shape. This problem
was a long-standing blocker for biological
research and Google’s work has now opened the
way for many biological discoveries. 4

Hyper-Personalization
The hyper-personalization pattern creates systems
that cater to the individual. The pattern is defined
as using ML to develop a profile of each individual
and having that profile learn and adapt over time
for various purposes, including displaying relevant
content, recommending products, providing
personalized recommendations, and other
services. The goal of this pattern is to personalize
services for everyone.
Netflix utilizes this pattern in the user’s dashboard,
recommending shows that match the genre and
type of previously watched shows. Artificial
intelligence helps filter Netflix’s catalog to present
the appropriate choices to each user. The pattern
is also used in other industries such as finance,
healthcare, and personalized fitness.
As another example, in the United States,
creditworthiness is determined by your FICO score.
This system categorizes a wide range of individuals
into a tier of creditworthiness despite their
individual differences in saving and payment
habits. AI, through the hyper-personalization
pattern, can be used to create a process that more
accurately determines an applicant’s credit
categorization.

Pattern and Anomaly Detection
With the power of
goal-driven patterns,
organizations can enable
their systems to find, through
trial and error, the optimal
solution to a problem.

Machine learning has become particularly adept at
identifying patterns and finding anomalies or
outliers in data and processes. The pattern and
anomaly detection pattern is an approach to AI
projects that has seen increasing adoption. The
goal of this pattern is to use ML and other cognitive
approaches to review patterns in data sets and the
higher-order connections between data points.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

9

This analysis can determine whether the pattern is
an outlier or an anomaly from existing patterns.
This AI service aims to find what fits with existing
data and what doesn’t.
Typical applications of this pattern are in fraud and
risk detection, minimizing and fixing human
mistakes, or in a predictive manner to suggest
words to speed up the writing process. The last
example is one many people will be familiar with,
from Grammarly’s writing assistant product to
Apple’s autocomplete capability on iPhones.

Machine learning has
become particularly adept at
identifying patterns and
finding anomalies or outliers
in data and processes.

Predictive Analytics
The predictive analytics pattern uses ML and other
cognitive approaches to understand how past or
existing behaviors can determine the probability of
a future outcome or provide predictive analysis to
help in the decision-making process. The objective
of this pattern is to help humans or processes
make better decisions.

The predictive analytics pattern helps to make
better decisions by utilizing ML to provide
augmented intelligence capabilities.
For example, the ad slots on a web page, such as
The New York Times, are auctioned off each time
the page loads. Ad tech companies have created
predictive analysis services to determine the
optimal bid price to win the auction for an ad slot.

Recognition
A major advancement in ML is using deep learning
to improve the accuracy of recognition-related
tasks. The recognition pattern utilizes ML and other
cognitive approaches to distinguish different
images, video, audio, and objects, including
classifying and identifying objects. The pattern
determines and classifies objects and identifies an
object within an image, video, audio, text, or other
unstructured data. The objective of this pattern is
to have machines identify and recognize things.
Examples include image and object recognition,
facial recognition, audio and sound recognition,
handwriting and text recognition, and gesture
detection. This pattern has been well developed
and is widely used. Many people are familiar with
this pattern through the facial recognition feature
that unlocks mobile phones and other devices.
Google employs the feature to isolate items in an
image and search the internet for that item’s best
shopping price.

This pattern’s uses include:
•

Assisted search and retrieval;

•

Predicting some future value for data;

•

Predicting behavior;

•

Predicting failure;

•

Assisted problem resolution;

•

Identifying and selecting best fit;

•

Identifying matches in data; and

•

Optimization activities.

Utilizing the Seven Patterns for AI
Project Success
These patterns can be implemented individually to
help organizations with everything from business
strategy to customer retention. However, the
chances of success are heightened when an
organization combines one or more of the patterns.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

10

Assessing these patterns will help organizations better approach, plan, and execute their AI
projects. Emerging methodologies are focusing on the use of these seven patterns to
expedite AI project planning and execution. For example, knowing that you’re utilizing a
recognition pattern can expedite the planning process. Planning teams can strategize on:
•

Solutions that have been applied to that problem;

•

Data required to power the pattern;

•

Use cases to explain the problem and solution; and

•

Algorithm and model development tips.

Categories of AI
As AI evolves and branches into diverse types that transform the interactions among
machines, humans, and data, two distinct categories have arisen. In broad terms, these
categories are dependent on the output from the AI models employed. Is AI being used in
a creative or generative process or an analytical or predictive one?
At times, these categorical distinctions can be blurred. Is autocorrect generative or
predictive? The same question applies to a process that predicts sales for a period and
then outputs those predictions in a report.
These categories help us—the humans in the AI equation—to understand the overall goal
of a process and determine if its end result is a success or failure.

Generative AI
Generative AI (GenAI) represents a specific, vital application subset within the broader
domain of AI, focusing on the creation of new content. Generative AI is the application of
ML techniques to the creation of new data based on learned patterns. The most popular
GenAI solutions in the market are large language models (LLMs) trained on a huge amount
of internet data.
The generative models are usually specific to the kind of thing you want to generate. Text
generators are optimized for text and can’t really generate images. Image generators are
optimized for images and can’t really generate text.
Prompts are natural language instructions for an LLM provided by a human so that the AI
will deliver the desired results.

GenAI Foundation Models
Foundation models are large, pretrained models focused on a general domain such as
language or computer vision. These foundation models have changed how data scientists
approach ML development. Rather than build an AI system from scratch, they can utilize a
foundation model as a starting base, reducing up-front time and costs.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

11

These models must be very large to address a wide
range of tasks. They are pretrained using a massive
amount of unlabeled and generalized data and can
perform multiple tasks like NLP, answering
questions, or generating images. Compared to the
singular focus of a standard ML model, foundation
models’ adaptability and ability to get a project
started quickly make them attractive for various
projects.

generation. They are also versatile and proving to
be helpful for a variety of processes, including:

Training these huge foundational models requires
enormous computing power and carefully curated
training data sets. Once trained, they can be
adapted or fine-tuned for more specialized tasks
through additional training on relevant data. They
are adaptable through prompting to generate
different required responses.
Foundation models can be used for a single task or
combined with the output from multiple models.
They can also be refined for specific applications or
enhanced with databases to customize them for an
organization’s content.

Training these huge
foundational models requires
enormous computing power
and carefully curated
training data sets.

Large Language Models
Large language models (LLMs) are trained
foundation models—a deep learning neural network
model configured to generate humanunderstandable text from human-provided
prompts. They use large data sets to understand,
summarize, generate, and predict new content.
Large language models leverage transformer
models. These models track the relationships in
sequential data, like a sentence, to learn the data’s
order and meaning. These models have proven
especially powerful for NLP applications and image

•

Content and text generation;

•

Text summarization and translation;

•

Searches and information retrieval;

•

Questions and answers on documents;

•

Classification and categorization of content;

•

Code generation; and

•

Art generation.

Generative Pretrained Transformer Models
Generative pretrained transformer (GPT) models are
foundational models that utilize neural network ML
models to transform input prompts into text, image,
audio, or other types of content. Transformer
models are quickly becoming the preferred model
for a wide range of applications that require
transforming one sequence into another. The GPT
models can be used to transform a text sequence,
such as a prompt, into another text sequence or a
text prompt into an image.
Models like ChatGPT from OpenAI, Copilot from
Microsoft, or Llama from Meta are powerful LLMs
driving many current AI applications.

How GenAI Works
GenAI models are a type of deep learning neural
network. The underlying ML model outputs the data
that users want to generate. The most popular
GenAI solutions in the market are powered by LLMs.
These models are trained on a massive amount of
data sourced from the internet. This process is
known as pretraining. This data enables the AI to
understand the nuances of the text. These
pretrained, big, neural network AI models can use
their patterns to generate new text, images, or other
content. Using natural language prompts, users can
generate these outputs without having to do any
coding or building of specialized models.
Figure 3 shows the relationship among all of the
different technologies needed to make these GPT
systems work.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

12

Artificial Intelligence

Machine Learning

Deep Learning
Large Language
Models

Generative AI

GPT
Figure 3. The Relationship Among the Technologies Needed to Make GPTs Work

Prompts and Prompt Engineering
A GenAI system can be a useful tool for assisting or augmenting the needs of project
professionals. Its value, however, can only be realized through the instructions provided to
it. These instructions, called prompts, supply the system with context and guidance as well
as constraints to the responses they provide. Prompts can help format and personalize the
responses as well as make interactions with AI systems more efficient.

What Is a Prompt?
A prompt is a request a user submits to a GenAI system to perform a task. If you have used
ChatGPT, then you have written a prompt. A GenAI system is powered by LLMs that enable
the AI to analyze massive amounts of data and output detailed responses.
Having such a deep breadth of content to draw from can be both beneficial and
detrimental for a GenAI system. It is beneficial as the system can provide an answer, even
with a single-word prompt. It is detrimental because of the vastness of its training data; the
less specific a prompt, the more likely the results will be vague or unhelpful.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

13

As an example, this prompt: “I am a project
manager and I need help with planning my project”
is too vague to generate any helpful response.

•

Give examples. Embed specific examples in the
input text to aid the LLM in understanding the
desired output format or preferred answer. It
can be something as simple as: “Use this as an
example.’’ This proves especially beneficial for
tasks demanding a particular structure or
format, like generating code or crafting specific
types of text. As OpenAI says in its GPT-4 guide: 6
“The less the model has to guess at what you
want, the more likely you’ll get it.”

•

Make it a conversation, not a command. Per
the OpenAI GPT-4 guide: “These models can’t
read your mind. If outputs are too long, ask for
brief replies. If outputs are too simple, ask for
expert-level writing. If you dislike the format,
demonstrate the format you’d like to see.”
Interact with the LLM like it’s an intern who
needs constant instructions. Note what types of
prompts give the best results and refine the
input accordingly.

•

Incorporate a “reliability check.” Include a
request for references and sources in the ask.
Even though some LLMs don’t browse the web
in real time, this can still prompt them to provide
the name of a source that can be verified via a
simple online search. It also prompts the model
to assess the output as a “sanity check” and
helps ensure that the generated content aligns
with the desired accuracy and reliability
standards.7

Changing the prompt to be more specific, such as
“I am a project manager and am in the planning
phase of my project. I don’t know which project
management approach to use. What are the key
considerations for selecting one?” will enable the
AI system to generate a more detailed response.
The ability to input specific requests is one of the
keys to optimizing an AI system. With practice and
some simple guidelines, good prompt writing can
become second nature. The following points
should be considered when formatting a prompt:5

Organizations have begun
to realize that good inputs
are just as critical as the
underlying ML and data
within an AI system.
Companies are training staff
on the proper way to write a
prompt and a new role has
emerged related to AI: the
prompt engineer.

•

•

Use a “diverge and converge” approach. Start
with a broad, open-ended question to utilize the
GenAI tool for its exploration capabilities. Once
the tool provides a general framework, converge
on each element. Use the following steps to
generate more effective answers. Project teams
can also design a sequence of prompts to
address distinct outputs and objectives.
Provide more context than you would to a
human. Detail the problem or question well, and
be specific about things such as industry,
region, type of project, and the task. Outline the
project’s background, describe the person using
the GenAI tool (like a project manager), and say
how and where the answer will be used. The
granularity of the input will be directly
proportional to the utility of the output received.

Organizations have begun to realize that good
inputs are just as critical as the underlying ML and
data within an AI system. Companies are training
staff on the proper way to write a prompt and a
new role has emerged related to AI: the prompt
engineer.

What Is Prompt Engineering?
Consider this scenario: An investment bank that
employs tens of thousands of wealth managers
wants to utilize a GenAI system to help them find
information in the large number of annual reports
and earnings-call transcripts they need to review.
The company provides training for wealth
managers in writing good prompts. They also hire
prompt engineers, specialists that can help finetune the underlying LLMs with specific prompts
and recommended responses.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

14

In essence, prompt engineers help train the ML
system on not just the industry-specific language,
but also the nuances and intent of a query. This
process helps calibrate the AI system to provide
optimized response quality and reduce bias and
hallucinations.

consistent output each time. For example,
GenAI systems struggle with basic math
calculations and with spelling text correctly in
images.
•

Incorrect outputs. When a GenAI system
provides an incorrect output, it is known as a
hallucination. These models are trained on
data, but if the data are incorrect or
incomplete, the model can learn incorrect
patterns and produce a hallucination. GenAI
models don’t understand what they are
generating; they simply follow a series of
commands to output something. More
advanced LLMs have some processes that
could help catch falsehoods in the data, but all
GenAI models are susceptible to hallucinations.

•

Informational and data biases. GenAI is
susceptible to biases and stereotypes that
usually arise from the data it is trained on. This
can, in turn, reinforce biases and stereotypes
within the model and generate results based
on these biases. There are also concerns
regarding moral and ethical issues in both the
inputs and outputs. Developing guidelines and
safeguards is crucial as this key application of
AI advances and becomes more accessible.

•

Misappropriation of intellectual property.
GenAI is trained on data from many sources,
including protected intellectual property (IP).
GenAI results can include protected IP without
permission or proper citations.

•

Potentially inappropriate responses. GenAI
systems can generate text, images, and other
formats that could be inappropriate such as
not-suitable-for-work (NSFW) content, images
or depictions of violence or gore, and hate
imagery. Popular GenAI models are increasing
their use of moderation filters to ensure the
outputs are not inappropriate. However, opensource models might not have those
restrictions, posing problems for text and
image generation.

•

Leaking confidential and private data. Public
models such as ChatGPT don’t necessarily
guarantee the privacy or confidentiality of data
submitted to their systems. A session’s chat
history is stored and might be used for

For example, in the scenario above, a wealth
manager might prompt the AI chatbot with:
“Summarize company XYZ’s most recent annual
report.” Within the code for this application there
could be an engineered prompt that is more
specific and replaces any generalized summary
request with: “Summarize the key performance
metrics of company XYZ’s most recent annual
report, including sections for revenue, net
incomes, and earnings per share.”
By combining prompt training for the end users to
create specific prompts and incorporating prompt
engineering to help train and adjust the LLMs, an
organization can optimize its use of AI to get the
most efficiency and productivity from it.

Prompt engineers help train
the ML system on not just the
industry-specific language,
but also the nuances and
intent of a query.

Limitations and Challenges of GenAI
The quality of outputs from GenAI systems is
remarkable. Again, we can see Moore’s Law in
effect. The pace of AI improvements keeps
accelerating and the capabilities of the models to
be customized for a wide range of tasks is
increasing. Despite its growth and recent success,
GenAI still has limitations and challenges. From a
functional point of view, AI can pose issues for
organizations due to:
•

High degree of variability. GenAI systems are
meant to create new outputs from inputs.
Despite advances in this area, there will always
be an element of variability in the output. A
GenAI system will not produce the same,

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

15

additional training data. Be cautious when
entering proprietary or personally identifiable
information (PII) into any GPT system.
•

Security vulnerabilities. LLM systems
embedded in third-party applications could be
open to malicious text prompts that cause the
models to do things or respond in ways they
shouldn’t. Prompt-injection attacks can get the
LLM system to reveal proprietary or private data
used for the system, including data used to
fine-tune the model.

The process of organizational
learning through GenAI is
challenging and necessitates
a symbiotic relationship
between humans
and machines.

In addition to functional issues, GenAI can present
challenges from an operational perspective. The
process of organizational learning through GenAI is
challenging and necessitates a symbiotic
relationship between humans and machines,
wherein both entities engage in continuous
reciprocal learning. This interaction, when
conducted properly over time and within suitable
contexts, enhances the intelligence, relevance, and
efficacy of both humans and machines. The
essence of success in GenAI endeavors lies in the
ability to facilitate this mutual learning. Project
professionals should endeavor to learn new
techniques such as prompt engineering for
interacting with GenAI.

Keeping Humans in the Loop
While AI can significantly augment and enhance
project management processes, it is unlikely to fully
replace human project practitioners in the
foreseeable future. Human oversight, judgment,
and decision-making will still be crucial, particularly
in complex or high-stakes projects. The project

professional’s experience and industry knowledge
play crucial roles in interpreting AI outputs and
integrating them into strategic planning and
execution, ensuring that the insights and outputs
provided by AI are aligned with the company’s
goals and market conditions.
The role of AI should be as a copilot to human
thought to increase the power of data, and
particularly in complex situations where the most
important factor is the understanding of the
situation, which can only be provided by a human.
The “human in the loop” (HITL) is an essential
element.
Implementing AI in project management ought to
be met with a balanced approach of weighing both
the innovative potential and the ethical
responsibilities. The HITL is an essential aspect of
the integration process and it is crucial that project
professionals understand the level of involvement
that is required to convert the output of a GenAI
exercise into a usable artifact.
In addition, while GenAI outputs can mimic humanlike language and communication, true empathy
and emotional intelligence are still challenging for AI
systems. Human customer service professionals
can provide the emotional support, understanding,
and genuine connection that customers often seek,
especially in challenging or sensitive situations, in
collaboration with GenAI via the human in the loop.

The role of AI should be as a
copilot to human thought to
increase the power of data.

The adoption of AI should follow a gradual
approach utilizing incremental and iterative testing.
This helps ensure that stakeholders’ expectations
are managed, while also ensuring that the project
team is not becoming overly dependent on the
technology. Such measures will be adopted by
organizations to enable team members to use AI
effectively in decision-making.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

16

Predictive AI
As its name implies, predictive AI is an AI system that makes predictions or
recommendations. These models use historical data to forecast future events or to classify
those events.
Predictive AI is a process to address problems such as:
•

Classification. What is the probability of an event, such as a loan default, occurring?

•

Forecasting. Determining the quantitative impact of events or attributes on one variable
(for example, a home’s value, which can be determined by its attributes, the age of the
house, number of rooms, and local schools, but also events, local market fluctuations,
Federal Reserve interest rates, and other factors).

•

Anomaly detection. Identifying data points that are outside the range of standard data
(for example, determining if an insurance claim is fraudulent).

•

Clustering. Grouping data that share characteristics or qualities (for instance, placing a
hospital’s patient population into a category based on qualifying characteristics such as
insurance provider, illness, or age).

•

Time series. A subset of forecasting where the model attempts to predict an event over
a time range (for example, growth in sales over the next three months or number of new
clients over the next week).

How Predictive AI Works
As stated above, predictive AI uses historical data to predict future outcomes. The more
data the system has access to, the more accurate its predictive capabilities will be. As with
GenAI, predictive AI returns the best results with clean data. Removing the outliers,
incomplete entries, and anomalies improves the results.
Predictive AI generally uses three types of techniques to perform its tasks:
•

Regression analysis. Regression is a statistical analysis technique used to study the
relationships among dependent and independent variables, such as a home’s value, and
the attributes and events they are dependent on.

•

Decision trees. These classification models categorize data based on their different
variables. They are called decision trees because the model resembles a tree, with each
branch representing a selection option and the leaf representing the result of that
selection. These models are best used when trying to understand and predict individual
decisions.

•

Neural networks. When there are complex predictive relationships, ML can utilize neural
networks. Neural networks are adept at pattern recognition and determining nonlinear
relationships and can also be used to validate the results of other techniques.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

17

Benefits of Predictive AI

Limitations of Predictive AI

Predictive AI is a game-changing technology for
organizations and corporations that can save time,
increase revenue, and lower costs with its
analytical powers. Some of the benefits of
predictive AI are:

Though predictive AI can be an asset to help a
business or organization grow, understand its
customers and clients, or determine courses of
action, it does have limitations. Understanding
these limiting factors can enable organizations to
optimize their use of predictive AI while
safeguarding their strategies from an overreliance
on AI. Some of the limitations or dangers of
predictive AI include:

•

Adaptability. With its ability to consume realtime data, predictive AI can adapt to changes to
variables, whether they are occurring in the
marketplace or a science lab.

•

Interpretability. This feature is the extent to
which humans can understand how the models
work and observe the relationship information
discovered by the model, either in the data or
through its learning.

•

Simplification. Predictive AI manages the
complex task of running statistical and
probability models and provides humans with
explainable answers and decision suggestions.

•

•

Overreliance on historical data. The
investment world’s axiom that past
performance does not indicate future returns
can be taken to heart here. An organization’s
historical data is an excellent starting point for
predictive AI. That data should be continually
augmented with real-time and external data
sources.

•

Data bias. If the underlying data are biased, the
model’s results may be inconsistent or wrong.
To mitigate the chances of bias affecting the
model’s results, the data should be analyzed
thoroughly before being input, and there should
be model governance practices instituted to
reduce the risk.

•

Lack of explainability. The more complex a
model, such as neural networks, the higher the
likelihood it will be less transparent and more
difficult to explain. Part of the success of an AI
system is having business leaders understand
how it functions and arrives at the predictions it
delivers.

•

Prediction bias. If a model receives too much or
too generalized training, its results can be
skewed. Customer-purchasing predictions that
are accurate for the produce section of a
grocery store may not translate to a footwear
store.

Automation. Automation is the ability to provide
predictive analysis, either on a timed cadence
or through an event trigger.

Predictive AI is a gamechanging technology for
organizations and
corporations that can save
time, increase revenue, and
lower costs with its
analytical powers.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

18

Applying AI in Project Management
Applying AI in Project

The first section of this guide provides an overview of AI. If you haven’t already, please read
it for a foundational understanding of AI technology. This second part covers a range of AI
applications tailored to project management tasks. Through case studies, it illustrates
successful AI implementations in various industries, demonstrating how AI-driven insights
can lead to more informed decision-making and improved project performance.
This section focuses on determining where AI can be most beneficial in project
implementations. By following the insights and strategies outlined in this guide, project
practitioners will be well equipped to harness the power of AI, drive innovation, and achieve
superior project results.

The Role of Project Professionals in AI Projects
As organizations increasingly adopt and integrate AI into their work, the roles of project
professionals are crucial in navigating the unique challenges and considerations that come
with these cutting-edge projects. Project practitioners will not only benefit from AI as an
assistive or augmenting tool, but will also play an integral role in the implementation of AI.
•

Governance and ethical oversight. Project professionals will play a vital role in
establishing robust governance frameworks and ethical guidelines for AI projects.
Project practitioners will help ensure that both the development and deployment of AI
systems align with organizational values, regulatory requirements, and societal norms.
This alignment includes addressing potential biases, privacy concerns, and the
responsible use of AI.

•

Risk management. All AI projects carry
inherent risks such as the potential for
unintended consequences, model
instability, or misuse. Project
professionals will be responsible for
identifying, assessing, and mitigating
these risks through comprehensive risk
management strategies, contingency
planning, and close collaboration with
AI experts and stakeholders.

•

As organizations increasingly
adopt and integrate AI into
their work, the roles of
project professionals are
crucial in navigating the
unique challenges and
considerations that
come with these cuttingedge projects.

Cross-functional collaboration. AI
projects often require a diverse set of
skills and expertise, including data
scientists, AI researchers, domain
experts, legal and ethical advisors, and
more. Project practitioners will facilitate effective communication and collaboration
among these cross-functional teams, ensuring alignment, knowledge sharing, and
seamless integration of efforts.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

19

•

Change management. The integration
of AI systems may require significant
changes to existing processes,
workflows, and organizational culture.
Project professionals will play a crucial
role in managing these changes,
addressing resistance, and ensuring a
smooth transition by providing training,
communication, and support to
impacted stakeholders.

As AI technology becomes
more prevalent, project
management practitioners
will play a pivotal role in
ensuring the successful
delivery of these complex
projects, while balancing
technical considerations
with ethical and
organizational priorities.

•

Performance monitoring and
evaluation. As AI systems are deployed
and integrated into various applications,
project practitioners will be responsible
for monitoring their performance,
evaluating their impact, and making necessary adjustments or refinements.
This includes establishing metrics, collecting feedback, and continuously
improving the AI systems.

•

Resource management. AI projects often require specialized hardware, computing
resources, and access to large data sets. Project practitioners will need to effectively
manage and allocate these resources, ensuring optimal utilization and costeffectiveness.

•

Continuous learning and adaptation. The field of AI is rapidly evolving, with new
breakthroughs and advancements happening regularly. Project professionals should
stay current with the latest developments, foster a culture of continuous learning within
their teams, and adapt project management plans and strategies as needed to leverage
emerging technologies and best practices.

As AI technology becomes more prevalent, project management practitioners will play a
pivotal role in ensuring the successful delivery of these complex projects, while balancing
technical considerations with ethical and organizational priorities. Their leadership,
communication skills, and ability to navigate cross-functional teams will be essential in
unlocking the full potential of GenAI while mitigating risks and fostering responsible
innovation.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

20

How Can AI Best Enhance Project Management?
AI is best applied where there is a need for machines to provide automation, assistance, or
augmentation of human abilities in key areas across the seven patterns of AI:
•

Autonomous systems. Systems that can accomplish a task.

•

Conversation and human interaction. Machines and humans interacting in
conversational ways.

•

Hyper-personalization. Catering to individual customers.

•

Goal-driven systems. Enabling AI to learn through the attainment of goals.

•

Pattern and anomaly detection. Finding anomalies or outliers in data and processes.

•

Predictive analytics. Determining the probability of a future outcome.

•

Recognition. Distinguishing different images, video, audio, and objects, including
classifying and identifying objects.

For a detailed overview of each pattern, see the section on AI Patterns in the first half of
this guide.
Figure 4 shows that AI systems are most efficient when used in an assisting or augmenting
capacity. These systems are better at handling processes with a high degree of variability
in inputs and outputs than repetitive tasks requiring high accuracy.

Project business
case creation

High

How complex is the task?

Project
decision-making
Risk
analysis
Large data set
analysis
Cost-benefit
analysis
Cost and schedule
estimation
Lessons learned
summary

Report
generation

Low
Meeting notes
summary

Machine

Automating

Assisting

Who does the work?

Augmenting
Human

Figure 4. AI’s Efficiency in Automating, Assisting, and Augmenting Processes

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

21

The next section will review how AI applications can perform or assist with various project
management tasks, providing a starting point for any project practitioner to begin
integrating AI into their routines.
As project practitioners begin to explore AI use for their own projects, a helpful resource is
the PMI Prompt Engineering Exchange, which contains vetted prompts used by a
community of project professionals.

AI in Project Management Planning
Every project has unique challenges and requirements and is performed by a specific team
that has unique strengths and weaknesses. GenAI can analyze past and current
organizational and project data to tailor project management approaches and
methodologies to better suit the current project’s needs and format a cohesive project
management plan.

Artificial intelligence is an
excellent fit for helping with
project planning as it can
quickly analyze vast amounts
of data, predict future
resource needs, and
optimize schedules.

A detailed project management plan can
be the determining factor between a
project’s success and failure. A plan with
well-defined requirements, roles,
schedules, resource allocation, risk
recognition, contingency actions, and
dependency awareness can help ensure a
project meets its objectives. Project
planning is so important to project
success that it has been noted as the
primary function of project management.

Artificial intelligence is an excellent fit for
helping with project planning as it can
quickly analyze vast amounts of data, predict future resource needs, and optimize
schedules. By applying AI, including GenAI, project management plans can be dynamically
adjusted in real time, enhancing flexibility and accuracy and contributing to more efficient
resource use and improved project outcomes. Some of the project planning tasks that AI
can assist with or augment are:
•

Project prioritization. When multiple projects are happening at once, it can be difficult
to prioritize the work. Every stakeholder wants their project’s work sent to the top of the
list. AI can help prioritize work through data-driven analysis of return on investment and
success potential. Using predictive analytics, an AI system can quickly provide a
hierarchical list of project tasks based on the input criteria.

•

Risk identification and management. Every project has some inherent risks, but
identifying those risks and developing contingency plans is time-consuming and
imperfect. AI can analyze historical project data and current project conditions in real
time to predict potential risks and suggest mitigation strategies.
•

Example prompt: Generate a risk assessment report for the project: [Upload project
management plan and historical project data]. Include a detailed analysis of 		
identified risks, their potential impacts, and recommended mitigation strategies.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

22

•

Resource allocation. How many projects have started as simple ones, only to become
more complex over time? The more complex the project becomes, the more difficult it is
to plan for resource allocation. AI can create an analysis of the project needs, current
capabilities, and potential dependency roadblocks to create an optimized resource
management plan.

•

Scheduling. The project team has
allocated the resources; now they must
create a schedule. This is easier said
than done. What if the project has
multiple teams across business units or
incorporates shared resources? How
do they account for dispersed teams
and time zone differences? The
automation pattern can create a
schedule based on project milestone
dates and resource availability.
•

•

•

AI can create an analysis of
the project needs, current
capabilities, and potential
dependency roadblocks to
create an optimized resource
management plan.

Example prompt: Generate a project schedule that accommodates the following
multiple teams across different business units, ensuring no resource conflicts. 		
[Provide team names and their availability and a list of shared resources, project
milestones, and deadlines.]

Creating business use cases. Business use cases help to understand a project’s
benefits or the step-by-step interactions between the product and clients. Use cases
can be difficult to write and may require in-depth research. GenAI, with proper
prompting, can help create business use cases for various personas.
•

Example prompt: Identify popular trends in the industry of [product or service] that
an audience of [target audience] will be interested in this [upcoming season].

•

Example prompt: How would you create a case study for [client] that focuses on their
last four years of growth in both products and employees? Include sections on 		
challenges, solutions, and outcomes.

•

Example prompt: Create a case study of [client] and their partnership with [partner].
Include details on collaboration, processes, challenges, benefits for each party, and
expected outcomes.

Vendor selection. The selection process can be difficult when a project requires a third
party to provide a work component. Research on the industry, pricing, competency,
capacity, and other factors will be required. GenAI can assist in this process, from
creating a checklist of required items from a vendor to quickly listing vendors, services,
and prices.
•

Example prompt: As a project manager, you need to select a vendor for [activity].
There are two vendors currently in the running. Each of their proposals is attached.
Provide a comparative analysis of the two vendors in table form.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

23

AI in Decision-Making
Each project, at every stage, requires a multitude of decisions, from vendor and resource
selection to budgets and timelines. Analyzing the factors involved can create delays at
each decision-making inflection point.
An AI solution can help remove some of the delays and uncertainty in the decision-making
process. By utilizing combinations of the autonomous system, predictive analytics, and
pattern and anomaly detection patterns, the time spent on decision-making, from
gathering to analyzing data, can be reduced. AI can contribute to better decisions to help
improve the overall success of a project.
The integration of GenAI into the decision-making process requires evaluation of ethical
and security concerns to make sure data are secure and unbiased, as this can give AI the
credibility it needs. High-quality and robust data governance is key to the success of GenAI
because performance is significantly influenced by the data used. GenAI should be
explicitly defined in the decision-making process, and the institution should maintain
transparency and develop directives to deal with bias as well as ethics.
•

Data-driven decision-making. Project
management involves handling vast
amounts of data, including timelines,
budgets, resources, and project
outcomes. Having a lot of data can
present problems with how they can be
filtered, measured, and visualized to be
useful in the project management
decision-making process to make
critical and strategic data-driven
decisions. GenAI can analyze these
data more efficiently than traditional
methods, providing insights that might
not be immediately apparent.
•

Example prompt: Generate a 		
dashboard that visualizes key 		
performance indicators (KPIs) such
as project progress, resource 		
utilization, budget adherence, and
risk factors. [Upload relevant data.]
Provide insights into areas needing
attention.

An AI solution can help
remove some of the delays
and uncertainty in the
decision-making process. By
utilizing combinations of the
autonomous system,
predictive analytics, and
pattern and anomaly
detection patterns, the time
spent on decision-making,
from gathering to analyzing
data, can be reduced.

•

Automated testing. Quality assurance is a key phase in the product life cycle,
particularly for technical products. AI-driven quality automated testing significantly
enhances quality assurance by using AI to analyze code, predict potential issues, and
execute comprehensive test scenarios. AI can use historical data to generate and
prioritize test cases, adapt to changes in the codebase, and provide real-time feedback.

•

Analyzing project trends. To help ensure success, project practitioners analyze project
trends to make informed decisions, track progress, and identify potential issues. These
trends can often be found in historical data but can be difficult to identify within
spreadsheets and reports. An AI service can filter through the data, find trends and
anomalies, and provide an analysis and course of action for them.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

24

AI in Project Monitoring
Project monitoring ensures a project is meeting milestones and deadlines. It assures the
project manager, key stakeholders, and others that the project is progressing as planned.
AI-assisted project monitoring can provide timed reports and overviews on the state of a
project, enabling the monitoring process to be leaner and more efficient.
•

Project reports. Reporting is essential
for project professionals as it provides
insights into a project’s health and the
AI-assisted project
actions necessary to keep it on track. It
monitoring can provide timed
is a vital information flow for team
reports and overviews on the
members, key stakeholders, and
state of a project, enabling
executive staff. GenAI can automate
tasks such as scheduling, generating
the monitoring process to be
reports, and updating project statuses
leaner and more efficient.
that practitioners can then review for
accuracy. This automation allows
project professionals to focus on more
strategic aspects of their projects, such as risk management and stakeholder
engagement, thereby enhancing overall productivity. Project professionals can enhance
their efficiency by automating the creation of reports with GenAI.
•

Example prompt: Create an executive summary for the project’s monthly review.
[Upload project progress data.] Highlight key achievements, budget status, resource
utilization, and any critical risks.

•

Project tracking. Project reports require detailed tracking of project data. The data can
be momentous, such as when a milestone has been reached or a project component
has progressed, like the number of remaining Jira tickets. These reports can take time to
compile and may potentially be outdated by the time they are delivered. AI can track
project data in real time to create live reports that reflect a project’s actual status and
progress.

•

Project health statistics. The health of a project can be determined by reviewing key
metrics such as schedule adherence, budget performance, resource allocation, risk
assessment, scope management, and other data points.
•

Example prompt: Generate a dashboard that visualizes the overall health of the
project. [Upload project data.] Include charts and graphs showing progress, budget
status, resource allocation, and risk levels.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

25

AI in Communication and Collaboration
Effective communication is crucial in project management. GenAI can facilitate improved
communication by generating status updates, reports, and tailored messages to
stakeholders. It can also translate technical jargon into simpler language, making
information more accessible to all project stakeholders, thereby ensuring everyone involved
in the project is working with the same information.
•

Automating communications. One key to a successful project is providing the right
information to the right people at the right time. Information synergy, ensuring all
decision makers have the same data on which to make their decisions, is vital. With
dispersed teams, having the ability to find the knowledge they need through trusted
sources enhances productivity and saves time. AI systems are uniquely positioned to
assist and augment the communications strategy of any project management team.
They can run chatbots that enable users to get the information they need or automate
the distribution of project data in real time.

•

Note-taking and dictation. The
business world can, at times, seem like
an endless series of meetings, both
on-site and virtual. One of the leading
uses of AI has been meeting assistance, specifically taking meeting notes.
Some of the benefits of allowing an AI
meeting assistant to take the meeting
minutes include:

•

•

Transcription. Through NLP, the AI
can convert the meeting conversations into accurate text, eliminating the need for manual transcription.

•

Organization. Meeting assistants can categorize and tag notes to organize them.

•

Search. Using AI to create the meeting notes enables meeting summaries to 		
become searchable within a notes archive.

•

Integration. Meeting notes can be integrated with other productivity tools and used
as part of ML training.

Aggregating information. Projects produce large amounts of information, and
aggregating, organizing, and distributing it can be a time-consuming task. An AI system
can aggregate and organize the information in real time and distribute it to the correct
recipients on a cadenced or event-triggered schedule.
•

•

GenAI can facilitate improved
communication by
generating status updates,
reports, and tailored
messages to stakeholders.

Example prompt: Collect and aggregate feedback from project stakeholders. 		
[Upload feedback data.] Organize feedback by theme and priority and distribute a
summary report to the project manager.

Automated to-do lists and reminders. Task reminders are great for helping workers
create a hierarchy of their work—if you can remember to create the reminder. AI can
create task reminders on various event triggers such as milestone completion or
ticket closures.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

26

AI in Document Management
Every project has various documentation needs, from regulatory requirements to user
guides. An AI system can monitor the current state of both required and added
documentation and can even create needed content.
•

Identifying documentation needs. Documentation is often overlooked until the near
completion of a project, particularly in software development. Engineering teams, often
burdened with tight capacities and deadlines, can struggle, even with a documentation
team on hand, to create basic content or even determine what content to create. An AI
model can review the code base or project details to decide what content is needed
and, in some cases, generate the content.

•

Analyzing key insights from documentation. Project documentation analytics is ripe
with actionable data. Reviewing page views and search queries can indicate what
features users value most and indicate where learning modules can be of value. A
combination of views and document age can prioritize which content needs to be
reviewed. This analysis takes time and resources. An AI assistant can gather the
necessary metrics and provide a report with actionable items.
•

Example prompt: Analyze the page views of all project documentation over the past
month. [Upload page view data.] Identify the most- and least-viewed documents and
provide insights into user engagement.

AI in Cost Management
Keeping a project within its allocated
budget is a prime responsibility for project
professionals. There are countless stories
of projects that have gone over budget or
were shut down due to cost overflows—
and the impact of a shutdown goes
beyond the project. PricewaterhouseCoopers found that when a corporation
announces a shutdown of a capital
project, there is a correlating average
reduction of 15% in share price. 8

By using predictive analysis
and pattern recognition,
GenAI can help generate a
first draft of a cost-benefit
analysis that highlights
potential returns and costs
associated with a project.

AI can assist the project professional in monitoring project expenses through
up-to-date financial data presented in spreadsheets and reports.
•

Budget optimization. Allocating resources as efficiently and effectively as possible is a
key goal of any project. A comprehensive budget analysis requires data about an
organization’s revenue, expenses, assets, and liabilities. These data will need to be
combined with factors such as project budget, market trends, consumer behavior,
competitors’ efforts, and other information. Gathering this data can be time-consuming.
Analyzing this information may require a specialist.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

27

•

Utilizing an AI system can streamline this task as well as provide project practitioners
with detailed analysis such as identifying potential budget overruns, optimizing resource
allocation, automating budget tracking, and other budget-related tasks.
•

Example prompt: A software development project has a US$100,000 budget and a
timeline of six months. After three months, the actual cost (AC) is US$60,000 and the
project is 50% complete. What are the risks of not completing the project on time
and on budget? Am I over or under budget at this point? Am I behind or ahead of
schedule? What is the earned value (EV), estimate to complete (ETC), and valueadded control?

•

Cost-benefit analysis. Determining
whether a project is worth the cost can
be daunting. From gathering the
An AI system can make the
information to crunching through
spreadsheets and reports, a costcost-planning process more
benefit analysis is not for the meek. By
efficient by reviewing
using predictive analysis and pattern
historical project costs
recognition, GenAI can help generate a
and providing a predicted
first draft of a cost-benefit analysis that
cost analysis for the
highlights potential returns and costs
associated with a project. AI can also
proposed project.
utilize predictive analysis and pattern
recognition to analyze financial data,
project metrics, and market trends. With
GenAI, organizations can create a more
detailed cost-benefit analysis of a project that a project practitioner would then need to
investigate deeper into the initial figures, considering various scenarios and integrating
additional data points to ensure the analysis is thorough and accurate.

•

Cost planning. Every project needs a cost management plan to determine the project
scope and what tasks can be accomplished within that scope. An AI system can make
the cost planning process more efficient by reviewing historical project costs and
providing a predicted cost analysis for the proposed project. It can also assist the
project practitioner in listing the financial approval requirements, locating approved
financial resources, and generating required financial documentation.
•

Example prompt: Compare the current project’s cost management plan with 		
historical projects of similar scope. [Upload historical cost data and current project
cost management plan.] Highlight any significant differences and provide 		
recommendations.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

28

AI in Training and Development
GenAI can also play a crucial role in the training and development of project professionals
and teams.
•

Scenario-based learning. By providing simulations and scenario-based learning, GenAI
can help project professionals improve their skills in a risk-free environment. This
training can cover various aspects of project management, from stakeholder
engagement to risk assessment, ensuring that project teams are better prepared for
real-world challenges.

•

Project simulations. Project management simulations can analyze current projects and
serve as a training tool for project practitioners. In real-world projects, simulations can
help reduce risks and optimize project management plans. AI can be utilized to create a
model and simulate different scenarios using project data. The model can then be used
to predict the outcomes of the different scenarios and provide the organization with
information to make a data-driven decision.

Getting the Most From AI
Organizations often find themselves
caught in the wave of the latest trend and
invest in resources without thoroughly
investigating if those resources are
appropriate to support their business
strategies. The use of AI throughout the
business world is no exception to this rule.

AI is a formidable asset that
can contribute to an
organization’s overall
goals and success.

AI is a formidable asset that can contribute
to an organization’s overall goals and
success. However, before implementing and integrating AI solutions, the KPIs and success
criteria should be defined. Focus on the business problems first and the AI solutions
second.

As a Project Professional
As a project professional, understanding how to effectively leverage AI within your projects
is crucial. By aligning AI initiatives with clearly defined business objectives and KPIs, you
can help ensure that your AI investments drive meaningful outcomes.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

29

Think Big but Start Small
As the saying goes, success begets success. Starting with smaller, easier-to-manage
implementations can save a company money and time as it ramps up its AI integration. An
organization’s first foray into AI should mimic the goal-driven system pattern, where trial
and error eventually lead to learning and can provide a blueprint for scalable success.
•

Take inventory of all your projects, including the latest status updates.

•

Create a portfolio of use cases that will be impactful, measurable, and can quickly be
implemented to provide an immediate solution.

•

Utilize the seven patterns of AI outlined in this guide to help plan those use cases.

•

Ensure your engineering staff has the capability to handle the data needs as well as the
AI installation and support.

•

Create cross-functional teams with the right mix of skills in subject expertise, business
skills, analytics, engineering, and AI.

Focus on the Data
Regardless of the type of system installed or patterns utilized, data are required to get the
most return on an AI investment. The more data an AI system can access, the better it can
perform, particularly for predictive and comparative analyses.
One of the more important preimplementation tasks is conducting a data assessment and
curation. AI systems still operate on the “garbage in, garbage out” axiom. Detailed, relevant,
and focused historical data will enable a company’s AI system to achieve more optimal
results. The following tasks should be performed:
•

Gather your data, including content in spreadsheets and reports;

•

Clean the data by removing or correcting missing values, outliers, or inconsistencies;

•

Format the data to make them compatible with ML algorithms; and

•

Reduce the complexity of data without losing the information.

As an Organization
Utilizing AI as an organization requires a
strategic approach to ensure successful
integration and alignment with overall
business goals. By carefully planning AI
initiatives, organizations can harness the
power of AI to drive innovation, improve
efficiency, and achieve long-term success.

By carefully planning AI
initiatives, organizations can
harness the power of AI to
drive innovation, improve
efficiency, and achieve
long-term success.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

30

Augmenting AI Systems to Get More Value
Many of the use cases and examples described in this guide can be used with off-theshelf AI technology and public LLMs. However, there are situations when those off-theshelf solutions can’t be used as-is or at all, or there is an organizational need to get more
from the off-the-shelf solution. In this case, project professionals should seek more
sophisticated approaches to extract value from AI systems.

Retrieval-Augmented Generation
There will potentially be scenarios where organizations need more from their AI system
than what was provided with the core implementation. When a project requires critical
data, such as domain-specific accuracy, up-to-date information, and contextual relevance,
the training data on which the LLMs have been built might not have the information
needed. For example, in complex project management tasks requiring detailed knowledge
from proprietary documents, historical project data, and industry-specific regulations,
project practitioners need approaches that augment LLMs with domain-specific,
proprietary, or other custom data.
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is an approach that leverages a data repository of
custom information that can be used to enhance the accuracy and relevance of generated
content. When a query is presented in a RAG system, the AI first retrieves content from a
database containing relevant data. This information is then used to inform and guide the
generation process, producing responses that are contextually appropriate and factually
accurate.
A RAG-augmented AI can dynamically retrieve and integrate specialized information to
generate precise and contextually appropriate responses. In contrast, public LLMs, which
rely on a static knowledge base up to their last training cut-off, may not provide the
specificity or current data needed for these tasks.
Project professionals might find RAG particularly beneficial for several reasons:
•

Enhanced accuracy and relevance. Unlike traditional prompt engineering, which relies
on crafting specific prompts to elicit desired responses from a generative model, RAG
ensures that responses are grounded in up-to-date and relevant information. This is
crucial for project management, where accurate and contextually relevant information is
essential for decision-making and planning.

•

Access to the latest information. RAG models can integrate the newest information
dynamically by retrieving the most current data available. This capability is especially
valuable in fast-paced project environments where conditions and information change
rapidly. Using RAG, project practitioners can ensure that the AI-generated insights and
recommendations are based on the most recent and pertinent data.

•

Reduced need for extensive prompt engineering. Crafting effective prompts for
generative models can be time-consuming and requires a deep understanding of the
model’s behavior. RAG simplifies this process by relying more on retrieving relevant
documents to inform responses, reducing the burden on project practitioners to
develop and fine-tune complex prompts. This allows project professionals to focus
more on strategic tasks than on the intricacies of prompt engineering.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

31

Fine-Tuning AI
When the available AI models cannot provide the specific results needed and RAG
solutions aren’t applicable, organizations might need to tailor the models to fit their specific
needs.
General-purpose LLMs are good for general-purpose NLP tasks. What if an organization
needs them to provide specific responses for non-NLP applications or other specific
requirements? LLMs generally don’t work well out of the box for highly specific tasks since
they are trained on general text data from the web.
For instance, if an LLM is to be used in a specialized industry, such as legal or medical
fields, fine-tuning is necessary to ensure the model understands and accurately processes
the industry’s terminology and nuances. Similarly, when a model must adapt to specific
organizational data or user preferences, refinement helps enhance its performance and
relevance.
Prompt engineering and RAGs might not
work well in some situations, including:
•

AI assistance with highly technical,
specific, or proprietary information;

•

Tasks that require interaction with a
very specific set of information;

•

Training in languages that isn’t well
covered by the mode;

•

Avoiding publicly available LLMs for
cost or privacy/security reasons; and

•

Increasing response time and speed.

When a model must adapt to
specific organizational data
or user preferences,
refinement helps enhance
its performance
and relevance.

In these and other scenarios, LLMs can be tweaked to be better aligned with target
applications, more accurate, and more context-aware about what NLP responses are
needed.
Fine-tuning AI systems involves several steps, beginning with collecting and preparing a
relevant data set. This data set should be representative of the specific tasks or domains
where the AI will be applied. For LLMs, this might involve gathering domain-specific texts or
user interactions that reflect the language and context the model needs to understand.
The model then undergoes a training process on this data set, adjusting the various model
parameters to better align with the new information. Monitoring performance metrics
during this process is crucial to avoid overfitting, where the model becomes too tailored to
the fine-tuning data and loses its generalization.
Fine-tuning AI models, particularly LLMs, can be resource-intensive, requiring significant
computational power and time. Organizations should have the necessary infrastructure to
handle these demands such as powerful GPUs or access to cloud-based AI training
services. They also need the requisite skills and experience to run fine-tuning projects.
Monitoring the training process closely is also beneficial and teams can use tools that
visualize performance metrics and model behavior to make real-time adjustments.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

32

After fine-tuning, it is crucial to rigorously evaluate the model to ensure it meets the desired
performance standards. This involves testing the model on a separate validation data set
that it has not seen during the fine-tuning process to check for overfitting and assess its
generalization ability.

Using Other Off-the-Shelf Models
While the popular LLMs are powerful and continue to evolve with increasing capabilities,
they are still primarily focused on prompt-based interaction styles for generating or
analyzing content in one or more modes. Needs for different AI patterns, such as pattern
and anomaly detection, predictive analytics, autonomous systems, goal-driven systems,
and hyper-personalization, might not be able to effectively or efficiently use the generalpurpose LLMs.
In many cases, pretrained models have already been built to address those specific needs.
Off-the-shelf, publicly available, pretrained ML models are an excellent resource for many
applications, especially when time, resources, or expertise to develop custom models are
limited. These models, trained on large data sets by reputable institutions or companies,
can be quickly deployed to solve various problems across different domains. They are
particularly useful for tasks like image recognition, speech-to-text conversion, and
sentiment analysis, where pretrained models provide state-of-the-art performance without
requiring extensive training.
One of the primary benefits of using off-the-shelf models is reduced development time. For
instance, pretrained models like ResNet or Inception can be readily used in image
recognition tasks such as classifying objects in photos or detecting defects in
manufacturing lines. These models come with well-documented application programming
interfaces (APIs) and integration guides, allowing project professionals and developers to
implement them into existing systems quickly. Similarly, other models exist that have been
built for forecasting applications, anomaly detection, and other applications that can be
directly applied. Many of these models are posted on model-sharing and repository sites.
While off-the-shelf models offer significant advantages, there are key factors to consider
when deploying them:
•

Evaluating whether the pretrained model’s training data and performance metrics align
with your specific use case is essential. For example, organizations deploying a
sentiment analysis model for a niche industry should ensure the model has been trained
on relevant data sets or be prepared to fine-tune it with domain-specific data.

•

Consider the ethical implications and potential biases inherent in pretrained models.
These models may carry biases from their training data, so assessing and mitigating
any unintended consequences is crucial.

•

Ensure the models adhere to the organizational and industry privacy and data security
regulations.

•

Organizations should consider the support structure for these models. Many support
structures are small teams or individuals who may be unable to offer the assistance or
incident help that a larger company offers.

•

Review the end-user license agreements, citation requirements, and other legal
requirements associated with the model.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

33

Risks of AI in Project Management
Adopting any process involves potential risks, and organizations should conduct a full risk
assessment to determine whether the correct solution is available. AI systems are no
exception to this rule.

Data Privacy Issues
AI systems often require vast amounts of
data to function effectively, and this data
Regular audits and
can include sensitive information about
individuals and organizations. Compliance
assessments can help identify
with data privacy regulations, such as
and mitigate privacy risks,
General Data Protection Regulation
ensuring that the use of AI
(GDPR) or California Consumer Privacy Act
systems does not
(CCPA), is paramount when implementing
compromise the privacy of
an AI solution. Project professionals
should implement robust data-protection
stakeholders involved.
measures, including encryption,
anonymization, and access controls, to
safeguard personal and confidential data.
Regular audits and assessments can help identify and mitigate privacy risks, ensuring that
the use of AI systems does not compromise the privacy of stakeholders involved.

Personally Identifiable Information in the Data
Data collection can inadvertently capture sensitive or personally identifiable information if
not properly managed. For instance, an AI system that analyzes customer feedback might
collect names, addresses, and other private details from user reviews or social media
interactions. If data are not adequately anonymized or encrypted during storage, they can
become a target for cyberattacks, leading to potential data breaches. Unauthorized access
to such data can result in significant privacy violations, impacting individuals whose
information has been exposed—and the organization’s reputation.

Individual Identification Through Inference
Even when data are anonymized, AI systems can sometimes infer sensitive information
through data patterns. This process, known as inference, involves using seemingly
innocuous data to predict private attributes. For example, an AI system analyzing purchase
histories might infer a person’s health conditions or financial status. Additionally, advanced
algorithms can reidentify individuals by combining anonymized data with publicly available
information. This risk is heightened when AI systems access and cross-reference multiple
data sources. Such capabilities pose significant privacy threats, as individuals might
unknowingly have their personal lives reconstructed and exposed through AI inferences.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

34

Third-Party Data Risks
AI systems often operate within ecosystems involving multiple stakeholders, including
third-party vendors and cloud service providers. When data are shared across these
entities, the risk of compromising data privacy increases. Each transfer point introduces a
potential vulnerability, whether through inadequate security measures or differing privacy
standards across organizations. Furthermore, third-party AI tools might have embedded
tracking mechanisms or data collection practices that are not transparent to the primary
user. This lack of visibility and control over data handling by third parties can lead to
unintentional data leakage or misuse, exacerbating privacy concerns.

Lack of Data Usage Transparency
One of the fundamental issues with AI and data privacy is the lack of transparency
regarding data usage. Users are often unaware of how their information is being collected,
processed, and utilized by AI systems. This lack of informed consent can violate privacy
expectations and legal standards. AI systems might also employ complex algorithms that
are not easily understandable, making it difficult for users to grasp the extent of data usage
and its implications. Individuals cannot make informed decisions about their data without
clear communication and consent mechanisms, leading to ethical and legal challenges.

The Chilling Effect of Hyper-Personalization
AI systems have the capacity to create detailed profiles of individuals by analyzing their
behavior, preferences, and interactions. While this capability can enhance personalization
and user experience, it also raises significant privacy concerns. Detailed profiling can lead
to intrusive surveillance, where individuals feel constantly monitored and their behaviors
scrutinized. This can result in a chilling
effect, where people alter their behavior
due to privacy concerns, impacting their
AI systems have the capacity
autonomy and freedom. Moreover, in
environments where AI-driven
to create detailed profiles of
surveillance is used by employers or
individuals by analyzing their
governments, the potential for abuse and
behavior, preferences,
privacy invasion becomes even more
and interactions.
pronounced, necessitating robust
oversight and ethical guidelines.

The Data Life Cycle
How information is managed throughout its life cycle in AI systems can compromise
privacy. Many organizations lack clear policies on data retention, leading to the indefinite
storage of sensitive information. Prolonged retention increases the risk of data breaches
over time, as older data may not be subject to the latest security protocols. Additionally,
improper data-disposal methods can lead to residual data being recoverable by
unauthorized parties. Effective data life cycle management involves establishing clear
retention schedules, regularly purging outdated data, and ensuring secure disposal
practices (see Figure 5). Organizations can mitigate the long-term privacy risks associated
with AI systems by addressing these aspects.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

35

y
ro
st

Co
llec
t

Transmit
re and
Sto

Dispo
se
an
dD
e

Create and

The Data
Life Cycle

t
Re

ai

n

Use and

Dis

u
tri b

te

Figure 5. The Data Life Cycle

Data Ownership Concerns
Data ownership is another crucial aspect that project practitioners should consider when
deploying AI systems. Determining who owns the data used and generated by AI is often
complex, involving multiple stakeholders such as data providers, AI developers, and end
users. Clear agreements and contracts outlining data ownership rights are essential to
prevent disputes and ensure transparency. Project practitioners should work closely with
legal teams to draft comprehensive data ownership agreements that specify how data can
be used, shared, and stored. This not only protects the interests of all parties involved but
also ensures that the project adheres to ethical standards and legal requirements.
To address data privacy and ownership concerns, project professionals should foster a
culture of ethical data practices within their teams. This involves promoting awareness
about the importance of data privacy and ownership, and training team members on best
practices for handling data. Additionally, implementing strict data governance policies
helps maintain control over data usage and ensures compliance with relevant laws and
regulations. By prioritizing ethical data practices, project practitioners can build trust with
stakeholders and enhance the credibility of their AI initiatives, ultimately leading to more
successful and sustainable project outcomes.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

36

Data Bias and Fairness
Machine learning models use existing data to support decision-making. Bias in the models
represents a serious point of consideration when adopting AI, given the multitude of data
sources and the lack of a single source of truth regarding data quality validation. Bias
represents challenges and risks for the following reasons:
•

•

There is a lack of accurate and
complete data throughout the
organization. No organization has
complete insight into its existing data
or its underlying uncertainties.
As humans, project professionals and
the sources of data used are prone to
different forms of bias, which can
present problems for AI inputs and
outputs.

Can AI Counter Bias?

By prioritizing ethical data
practices, project practitioners
can build trust with
stakeholders and enhance the
credibility of their AI initiatives,
ultimately leading to more
successful and sustainable
project outcomes.

As a society, we accept bias in some
situations. An example is car insurance
premiums. Two people with cars of the same make, model, and year who live in similar
homes on the same street and work for the same employer doing the same job may pay
different rates. Age, gender, and marital status are considered when applying for
insurance rates.
With an AI-based system, it’s possible that none of your personal characteristics would
factor into your car insurance rate. Instead, the rate would be based largely on your driving
behavior. If car insurance companies had comprehensive data on how often you drive, how
fast you drive, how hard you brake, and how closely you follow the vehicle in front of you,
they could establish rates based on performance rather than just demographics.
Project practitioners should be trained in bias mitigation as a prerequisite to using AI.

Hallucinations, Misinformation, and Disinformation
A critical factor of AI systems is that they can often produce outputs that are incorrect.
Without knowledge of the subject material, project professionals might take outputs from
AI systems without realizing that the results are incorrect or misleading.
When an AI system generates incorrect or nonsensical information without any basis in the
training data or real-world context, it is called a hallucination. This happens because AI
systems are trained to provide outputs, even if they aren’t completely confident in those
outputs. When the training data cannot provide content for the requested information, the
AI system will confidently produce an incorrect response. For project professionals, this
means that reliance on AI-generated insights must be tempered with a critical review and
validation process to ensure that decisions are based on accurate and relevant information.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

37

To mitigate the risk of AI hallucinations, project practitioners should adopt several
strategies:
•

Ensure that AI models are trained on high-quality, diverse data sets that accurately
represent the project’s scope;

•

Regular model validation and updating should be conducted to maintain accuracy and
relevance; and

•

Human oversight should be integral in the decision-making process to catch and
correct AI hallucinations.

Using ensemble methods, where multiple AI models provide input, can also reduce the
likelihood of erroneous outputs. By implementing these practices, project professionals
can enhance the reliability of AI systems.

Misinformation
Misinformation from AI systems
represents a significant risk in project
management. Misinformation occurs
when AI provides information that is
incorrect or misleading due to errors in
data processing or interpretation. These
errors can stem from biases in the
training data, flawed algorithms, or
insufficient data quality.

It is crucial for project
professionals to implement
checks and balances such as
cross-referencing AI outputs
with human expertise and
ensuring transparency in
how AI systems derive
their conclusions.

When project practitioners use AIgenerated reports to make strategic
decisions, misinformation can lead to
misallocated resources, missed
deadlines, and failed projects. It is crucial for project professionals to implement checks
and balances such as cross-referencing AI outputs with human expertise and ensuring
transparency in how AI systems derive their conclusions.
Combating misinformation involves establishing robust AI practices prioritizing data
integrity and algorithm transparency. Project professionals should advocate for using
explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) systems, which provide insights into how AI decisions
are made. This transparency allows for better scrutiny and understanding of AI outputs.
Furthermore, maintaining a rigorous data governance framework ensures that the data
used by AI systems is accurate, up to date, and free from bias. Regular training for team
members on AI literacy can help identify and address misinformation promptly, thus
maintaining the accuracy of project deliverables.

Disinformation
Disinformation is when data sources intentionally have incorrect or misleading information
to steer AI systems to desired but incorrect outputs. Disinformation involves intentionally
spreading false information, and AI systems can be exploited for this purpose. Malicious
actors can manipulate AI systems by feeding them biased or fabricated data, leading to the
dissemination of harmful falsehoods.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

38

In the context of project management, disinformation can undermine trust, create conflicts,
and derail project goals. Project professionals should be aware of the potential for AI
systems to be targeted by such attacks and should incorporate security measures to
protect the integrity of their data and AI tools. This includes regular audits, data verification
processes, and educating team members on the risks of disinformation.
Proactive measures are essential to address disinformation in AI systems, such as:
•

Establishing protocols for detecting and responding to disinformation such as anomaly
detection systems that flag unusual patterns indicative of data manipulation;

•

Collaborating with cybersecurity experts to safeguard AI infrastructure against attacks;
and

•

Fostering a culture of critical thinking and skepticism toward AI outputs that can
empower team members to question and verify information before acting on it.

By understanding and addressing these vulnerabilities—hallucinations, misinformation, and
disinformation—project professionals can harness the full potential of AI systems while
mitigating risks. This balanced approach ensures that AI remains a valuable asset in
achieving project goals.

Manipulation and Deepfakes
AI systems, particularly those involved in content generation and analysis, have increasingly
been used for manipulation. These systems can generate persuasive text, fake news, and
misleading information at scale, impacting public opinion and spreading misinformation.
Advanced NLP models can create realistic, human-like narratives that deceive readers into
believing false information. This manipulation can influence decision-making, shape
consumer behavior, and sway public discourse. The ability to generate convincing, tailored
content makes AI a powerful tool for those looking to manipulate information.
Deepfakes represent a particularly concerning application of AI for manipulation. Utilizing
deep learning techniques, deepfakes create hyper-realistic audio, video, and images of
individuals, making it appear like they are saying or doing things they never did. These
manipulated media can be incredibly convincing, making it difficult for the average person
to discern what is real from what is fabricated. Deepfakes can be used to discredit public
figures, spread false information, and create sensationalized content for malicious
purposes. The ease with which deepfake technology can be accessed and used poses a
significant threat to the integrity of information and personal reputations.
Enhancing detection and verification tools is paramount to minimize the misuse of AI for
manipulation and deepfakes. Researchers and technologists are developing sophisticated
algorithms and forensic techniques to identify manipulated content. These tools analyze
inconsistencies in pixel patterns, lighting, and audio-visual synchronization that often
indicate deepfakes. By investing in and deploying these detection tools, organizations can
better identify and mitigate the impact of manipulated content.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

39

Promoting media literacy and awareness is another crucial strategy to combat AI-driven
manipulation. Educating peers and coworkers on how to evaluate information sources
critically, recognize signs of manipulation, and verify content through trusted fact-checking
services can reduce the spread of false information. By fostering a more informed and
discerning work environment, the effectiveness of manipulative AI content can be
significantly diminished.

AI and Data Security
AI systems also present significant data security and cyber threat concerns. The vast
amounts of data needed to train and operate AI models often include sensitive and
confidential information. This makes AI systems attractive targets for cybercriminals. Data
breaches can result in unauthorized access
to personal information, proprietary
business data, and intellectual property.
Additionally, the complexity and opacity of
By fostering a more informed
AI models can introduce vulnerabilities, as
and discerning work
identifying and mitigating security flaws
environment, the
within these systems is often challenging.
Furthermore, AI systems can be used
effectiveness of manipulative
maliciously to automate cyberattacks, such
AI content can be
as phishing and malware distribution,
significantly diminished.
exacerbating the threat landscape.
To mitigate data security issues associated
with AI, organizations should adopt a
multifaceted approach to data protection. First, employing strong encryption methods for
data, both in transit and at rest, is crucial. This ensures that even if data are intercepted or
accessed without authorization, they remain unreadable and unusable. Second,
implementing strict access controls and authentication mechanisms can limit who has
access to sensitive data, reducing the risk of insider threats. Regular audits and monitoring
can help detect unusual access patterns and potential breaches early. Additionally,
anonymizing data used in AI training processes can protect individual privacy and reduce
the impact of any potential data leaks.
Securing AI models and the systems that interact with them is also essential in mitigating
data security concerns. Organizations should conduct thorough security assessments of
AI systems to identify and address vulnerabilities. This includes testing for adversarial
attacks, where malicious inputs are designed to deceive AI models and produce incorrect
outputs. Techniques such as adversarial training, where models are exposed to and trained
on adversarial examples, can enhance their resilience. Furthermore, implementing secure
development practices, such as code reviews and penetration testing, can help ensure that
AI systems are robust against cyber threats. Keeping AI software and libraries updated with
the latest security patches is also critical.
Human factors play a significant role in data security, and enhancing employee awareness
and training is crucial. Organizations should invest in regular cybersecurity training for
employees, emphasizing the importance of data protection and the specific risks
associated with AI systems. Training programs should cover best practices for handling
data, recognizing phishing attempts, and responding to security incidents. Creating a
culture of security awareness can empower employees to act as the first line of defense
against data breaches and cyber threats. Encouraging employees to report suspicious
activities without fear of repercussions can also help in the early detection and mitigation
of security issues.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

40

Strong data governance policies are fundamental to securing AI systems and the data they
handle. These policies should define clear data collection, storage, processing, and sharing
guidelines. Ensuring compliance with relevant regulations, such as GDPR or the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), is essential to avoid legal
repercussions and protect user privacy. Data governance frameworks should also include
regular audits and compliance checks to ensure data practices align with established
policies. By maintaining rigorous data governance, organizations can create a structured
and secure environment for AI operations, minimizing the risk of data security breaches
and ensuring the integrity of their AI systems.
Finally, collaboration and information
sharing among organizations, industries,
By maintaining rigorous data
and government bodies can enhance data
security in AI systems. Sharing information
governance, organizations can
about emerging threats, vulnerabilities, and
create a structured and
best practices can help organizations avoid
secure environment for AI
potential security issues. Participating in
operations, minimizing the risk
industry consortia and working groups
focused on AI and cybersecurity can
of data security breaches
provide valuable insights and resources.
and ensuring the integrity of
Governments should also play a role by
their AI systems.
facilitating public–private partnerships and
supporting research into advanced
security measures. By fostering a
collaborative approach to data security, the broader community can collectively address
the challenges posed by AI systems and create a more secure digital ecosystem.

Emerging AI Regulations and Laws
As AI technologies rapidly evolve, governments and regulatory bodies worldwide are
beginning to establish laws and regulations to manage their impact. These emerging
regulations address many concerns, including data privacy, ethical AI usage, accountability,
and transparency. The European Union (EU) has proposed the EU Artificial Intelligence Act,
which seeks to classify AI systems based on risk levels and impose corresponding
regulatory requirements. 9 Similarly, the United States is considering various legislative
measures to ensure AI systems are developed and used responsibly. These regulations are
designed to protect consumers, ensure fair competition, and prevent harm caused by AI
applications.

Organizations should
continuously monitor
regulatory developments
and adapt compliance
strategies to meet
changing requirements.

One of the primary challenges
organizations face in keeping up with AI
regulations is the rapid pace of
technological advancement. AI systems
evolve quickly, often outpacing the
regulatory frameworks designed to govern
them. This can lead to a compliance gap
where existing regulations do not
adequately address new capabilities or
potential risks of emerging AI technologies.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

41

Organizations should continuously monitor regulatory developments and adapt compliance
strategies to meet changing requirements. This demands significant resources, including
legal expertise, compliance infrastructure, and ongoing employee training. Additionally, the
global nature of AI means that organizations operating across multiple jurisdictions must
navigate a complex web of regional regulations, each with its own standards and
enforcement mechanisms.
Table 2 captures a snapshot of AI regulations and guidelines from various countries
and regions.
Table 2. Existing AI Regulations and Guidelines

Regulation

Issuing
Body

Year
Issued

Summary

AI National
Strategy

China

2017

A roadmap for AI development aiming to make
China a global leader in AI by 2030, with a focus on
ethics, safety, and the use of AI in various
industries.

GDPR (General
Data Protection
Regulation)

European Union

2018

Comprehensive data protection law that includes
provisions affecting AI, particularly concerning data
privacy, consent, and the right to explanation.

AI Ethics
Guidelines

European
Commission

2019

Nonbinding guidelines promoting trustworthy AI
and emphasizing human-centric AI, accountability,
transparency, privacy, and robustness.

Executive Order
on AI

United States

2019

Promotes AI development in line with American
values, emphasizing research, development, and
ethical considerations, but not a binding regulation.

Ethics Guidelines
for Trustworthy AI

Japan

2019

Provides ethical guidelines for AI development,
focusing on respect for human dignity, privacy, and
transparency, promoting AI that is beneficial to
society.

AI Development
Plan

South Korea

2019

Strategy to advance AI technology, emphasizing
ethical considerations, transparency, and the use
of AI for public good.

AI and Privacy
Policy Framework

Canada

2020

Sets principles for AI use, including accountability,
transparency, and respect for human rights and
privacy, as part of a broader digital charter.

AI and Data Ethics
Framework

Australia

2020

Provides principles for ethical AI development,
including transparency, accountability, privacy
protection, and human-centric values.

Artificial
Intelligence Act

European Union

2021

Aims to regulate AI systems based on risk levels,
with strict requirements for high-risk AI systems
and prohibitions on certain harmful AI practices.

AI Regulation
Proposal

European Union

2021

Proposed regulation for high-risk AI applications,
including strict requirements for data quality,
transparency, human oversight, and robustness.

NIST AI Risk
Management
Framework

National Institute
of Standards and
Technology

2023

Provides guidelines for identifying, assessing, and
managing risks associated with AI systems, with an
emphasis on trustworthiness and accountability.

AI and Algorithm
Transparency Law

United Kingdom

2023

Mandates transparency in the use of AI and
algorithms in decision-making processes, ensuring
fairness and accountability.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

42

Governments and regulating bodies face the challenge of keeping up with the fast-paced
evolution of AI technologies. Traditional regulatory processes are often slow and
deliberative, designed to provide thorough oversight and public consultation. However, this
approach can be too slow to address AI’s rapid advancements and new risks effectively.
There is a growing recognition of the need for more agile and adaptive regulatory
frameworks that can evolve with AI technologies. This strategy might involve creating
regulatory sandboxes where new AI applications can be tested under supervised
conditions, fostering collaboration among regulators and industry stakeholders, and
utilizing AI to enhance regulatory monitoring and enforcement.
Striking a balance between fostering
innovation and ensuring robust regulation
is a key challenge in AI. Overly stringent
regulations can stifle innovation, making it
Striking a balance between
difficult for companies to develop and
fostering innovation and
deploy new AI technologies. Conversely,
ensuring robust regulation is a
insufficient regulation can lead to misuse,
ethical violations, and public harm.
key challenge in AI.
Policymakers should work closely with
industry experts, researchers, and civil
society to craft regulations that protect
public interests without hindering technological progress. Public consultation processes
and multistakeholder dialogues are crucial in developing balanced regulatory frameworks
encouraging responsible innovation.
Given the global nature of AI, international coordination and harmonization of regulations
are essential. Disparate regulatory approaches across countries can create barriers to
innovation and complicate compliance for multinational organizations. Efforts are underway
to develop international standards for AI, led by organizations such as the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE). Harmonizing AI regulations can help create a level playing field, promote
best practices, and facilitate cross-border collaboration. However, achieving international
consensus is challenging due to differing national priorities, legal traditions, and levels of
technological advancement.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

43

AI Resources
Table 3 lists some of the currently available organizational and project management tools
with an AI component. From writing assistants to cost management, there is a tool that can
meet your organization’s needs.
Table 3. Common AI Organizational Tools Currently Available
Product

Writing
Assistance

Task
Management

Asana

✓

✓

ClickUp

✓

✓

Coda

✓

✓

Forecast

✓

Grammarly

✓

HubSpot

✓

✓

Kantata

✓
✓

Monday

✓

Notion

✓

ProofHub
Sembly

Cost
Management

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

Scoro

✓

Taskade

✓

Teamwork

✓

Wrike

✓

Writer

✓

Zapier

Resource
Planning

✓

Jira

Microsoft Project

Forecasting

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

44

PMI Infinity™
PMI Infinity™ is the PMI GenAI platform, packed with features that will help teams and
organizations achieve more. It is designed with features to help make project teams more
productive and efficient, such as:
•

Smart navigation to the most relevant, proven, and up-to-date project management
practices, with an expanding content database that has been vetted by the PMI global
community;

•

Cited original content for fast and easy validation;

•

Recommended queries and a prompt library to explore prompts searched and tested by
the PMI community;

•

Contextual understanding that differentiates between “learning” and “task” mode to
obtain more detailed responses focused on helping you get things done or diving
deeper into a topic; and

•

Built-in measures to protect organizational data. The AI chatbot exclusively learns from
PMI proprietary content, providing the cybersecurity you want.

PMI Resources
PMI has a selection of resources to assist project professionals in mastering AI for their
roles as well as a strategic tool for their organizations, such as:
•

AI @ Work: New Projects, New Thinking

•

AI Innovators: Cracking the Code on Project Performance

•

Generative AI and Prompt Engineering

•

Prompt Engineering Exchange

Visit the Artificial Intelligence in Project Management page of the PMI website to review all
our AI training and reports.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

45

Taking the Next Steps With AI
The most effective way to leverage AI technologies is to gain hands-on experience. AI,
particularly GenAI, offers a user-friendly entry point with its low learning curve, making it
accessible even for those with minimal technical background.
Start by identifying small, manageable projects where AI can add value such as
automating routine tasks, enhancing data analysis, or generating creative content. By
starting small, your team can experiment with AI tools, understand their capabilities, and
build confidence in using them. This initial exploration will provide valuable insights and lay
the groundwork for more ambitious AI initiatives.
One of the most significant advantages of
GenAI is its encouragement of
Once your team has gained
experimentation. As a project professional,
foster a culture where your team feels
initial experience and
comfortable experimenting with AI
confidence with AI, the next
applications, regardless of their experience
step is to scale its integration
level. Encourage team members to explore
across more complex and
different AI tools and techniques, test
various scenarios, and learn from
critical projects.
successes and failures. This iterative
process enhances the team’s
understanding of AI and uncovers unique
ways AI can be integrated into projects. By rewarding experimentation, you can cultivate an
innovative mindset that continually seeks improvements and new opportunities, driving
project success and team growth.
Once your team has gained initial experience and confidence with AI, the next step is to
scale its integration across more complex and critical projects. Leverage the insights and
skills developed during the experimentation phase to identify larger-scale applications of
AI that can significantly impact project outcomes. This could involve advanced data
analytics for strategic decision-making, automating complex workflows, or developing
AI-driven solutions tailored to your project’s unique challenges. As you scale AI integration,
ensure that continuous learning and adaptation remain core principles. By doing so, your
team will keep pace with AI advancements and maintain a competitive edge, delivering
innovative and efficient project solutions.

Further AI Guidance
Our companion guide will provide further guidance on organizational adoption of AI and
how AI impacts project management processes, approaches, and methodologies.

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

46

References
1. Moore, G. E. (1965, April 19). Cramming
more components onto integrated circuits.
Electronics, 38(8), 114–117.

6. OpenAI. (n.d.). Prompt engineering. OpenAI
Platform. https://platform.openai.com/
docs/guides/prompt-engineering

2. McCarthy, J., Minsky, M. L., Rochester, N.,
& Shannon, C. E. (1955, August 31). A
proposal for the Dartmouth summer
research project on artificial
intelligence. https://www-formal.
stanford.edu/jmc/history/dartmouth/
dartmouth.html

7. Project Management Institute (PMI).
(2020). Talking to the machine: The impact
of AI and machine learning on project
management. PMI. https://www.pmi.org/
learning/thought-leadership/promptengineering

3. Cognilytica. (n.d.). The seven patterns of
AI. Cognilytica. https://www.cognilytica.
com/the-seven-patterns-of-ai

4. Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green,
T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger, O.,
Tunyasuvunakool, K., Bates, R., Žídek, A.,
Potapenko, A., Bridgland, A., Meyer, C.,
Kohl, S. A. A., Ballard, A. J., Cowie, A.,
Romera-Paredes, B., Nikolov, S., Jain, R.,
Adler, J., Back, T., ...Hassabis, D. (2021).
Highly accurate protein structure
prediction with AlphaFold. Nature,
596(7873), 583–589. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-021-03819-2

8. PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC). (2013,
April). Correcting the course of capital
projects: Plan ahead to avoid time and
cost overruns down the road [PDF]. PwC.
https:// www.pwc.com/gx/en/capitalprojects-infrastructure/pdf/pwccorrecting-the-course-of-capital-projectsv3-pdf.pdf

9. European Commission. (2021). Proposal for
a regulation laying down harmonised rules
on artificial intelligence (Artificial
Intelligence Act) and amending certain
Union legislative acts. EUR-Lex. https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0206

5. Project Management Institute (PMI).
(2020). Talking to the machine: The impact
of AI and machine learning on project
management. PMI. https://www.pmi.org/
learning/thought-leadership/promptengineering

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

47

Contributors and Reviewers

Project Management Institute extends sincere appreciation to those who made this
guide possible.

Contributors and Reviewers
Claudia Alcelay, MBA, PMI-ACP, PMP
Kristian Bainey, MS, PMP
Joti Balani, BSc, MBA, Comp Sci
Edivandro Carlos Conforto, PhD
Ronald Dyer, DBA, CQRM
Dave Garrett
Mustafa Hafizoglu, PhD
Vered Holzmann, MBA, PhD, PMP
Anand Lokhande, PhD, PMI-RMP, PMP
Michael McCullough, MBA, CLSSBB
Masha Nehme, PMP
Sarah Philbrick, BFA, MEd
Lenka Pincot, PMI-ACP, PMI-PBA, PMP
Karthick Nivas Ramdoss, MBA, PMP
Nathan Rischling, MS, PMP
Alcides Santopietro, DAC, PMI-ACP, PMP
Ronald Schmelzer, MBA, CPMAI+E
Kathleen Walch, CPMAI+E

PMI Publications Team
Andrew Austin, PhD, CPhys, MIEEE
Kristin Dietz, MSML, CAE, CSPO
Julie Hardison, MBA, PMP
Kelly Heuer, PhD, CAPM
Christie McDevitt, APR
Kim Shinners
Steve Suranie

AI Essentials for Project Professionals
©2024 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

48

SKU: EL172

