Integrated change management
CONFERENCE PAPER ǀ Change Management ǀ 29 October 2013
Wanner, Markus F.
How to cite this article:
Wanner, M. F. (2013). Integrated change management. Paper presented at PMI® Global
Congress 2013—North America, New Orleans, LA. Newtown Square, PA: Project
Management Institute.
Watch the Climate Change and the Evolution of the
Project Management Profession Webinar
This webinar reports and discusses the findings of PMI-funded research to address the
question of how project, program, and portfolio management can be utilized and extended to
deal with the climate crisis and other societal challenges.
Watch the Webinar﻿
Abstract
Change management is an organized, systematic application of the knowledge, tools, and
resources of change that provides organizations with a key process to achieve their
business strategy.
The purpose of “integrated change management” is to achieve the desired target state by
integration of the organizational and individual change processes on the one hand and by
the integration of project and change management on the other hand.
The paper is based on the models of John P. Kotter, the Change Management Learning
Center – Prosci, the change experience of Tiba, and the PMI's 2012 Pulse of the
Profession In-Depth Report: Organizational Agility” (PMI, 2012).
The conclusion is that changes are manageable by applying “integrated change
management,” strategic initiatives are more successful and benefits will be achieved by
increased organizational agility.
Introduction
Low economic growth, changing global market conditions, innovation, and cost pressure lead
to a complex and dynamic company environment. To be competitive companies must live and
manage the constant change.
There are permanent changes within a company: implementation of new strategies,
organizations, systems, culture, and processes. In all of these endeavors change management
is crucial for success and acceptance of the results. Unfortunately change projects fail often!
Why?
What are the success factors of change management? What is necessary to realize and
sustain the change? Are the companies and the people ready and competent to run changes
successfully and to realize the important requirement regarding “organizational agility”?
Change Management – Definitions and Models
Change Management is an organized, systematic application of the knowledge, tools, and
resources of change that provides organizations with a key process to achieve their business
strategy.
Change management is a systematic approach to dealing with change, both from the
perspective of an organization and on the individual level. A somewhat ambiguous term,
change management has at least three different aspects, including, adapting to change,
controlling change, and effecting change. A proactive approach to dealing with change is at the
core of all three aspects.
John Kotter's Eight Step Approach to Change


Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
1/10

John Kotter (1996) created a very popular change management approach. The desired
change is conducted in eight steps. Exhibit 1 shows these eight steps in detail and how they
are linked with the four phases of the “integrated change management” approach (Wanner,
2012).
Exhibit 1 – Kotter´s Change Management Model
Kübler-Ross Model
On an individual level, we see different stages that a person experiences when going through
change. A common model that describes these stages has been developed by Elisabeth
Kübler-Ross (1969).
This model (Exhibit 2) has been widely adapted to many situations where someone suffers a
loss or change in social identity. When applying the model to a business context an
organizational change curve can be used to describe the stages.
Exhibit 2 – Kübler-Ross Model
Change Management – As-is and Target State
The most of the companies are far away from their target state regarding successful changes.
A strategy and benefit-oriented change management is not established.
One reason is the wrong assumption that change management is a “soft issue” only. Change
management is not in the focus of the top management with dramatic consequences
particularly for strategic initiatives. The role of the top management is crucial within a
transformation process. A sponsor should lead by clear vision and targets. Active and visible
sponsorship is needed in the difficult phases of a change (“valley of tears”).

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
2/10

Exhibit 3 – Change Management: As Is Situation and Target State
Overview: Integrated Change Management
Integrated Organizational and Individual Change Process
Change projects take place on an organizational and on an individual level. Both levels are
considered within the model of “integrated change management.”
The two processes “organizational change process” (projects) and “individual change process”
(people) are to be integrated to achieve the desired business results.
Exhibit 4 – Integrated Organizational and Individual Change Process
Integration of Project and Change Management
The scope is always in the focus of a project particularly if a change project should be
executed. But the supporting processes “project management” and “change management” are
crucial to be successful. Integrated professional project and change management will enable a
project manager as “temporary leader” to manage a change project and to achieve the
expected results.
Project management, the scope (functional content of the change), and change management
are to be integrated.
The change management of the single project must start before project start in the period of
project initiation and continue after project closure. Reinforcement and measurement will take
place in the application phase.

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
3/10

Exhibit 5 – Integration of Project and Change Management
Four phases of Integrated Change Management
A structured change management approach with four phases (Prosci, 2012) (with their 3-
phases-model) linked with the Project Management Institute process groups (PMI, 2013) are
necessary to manage a change successfully.
Exhibit 6 – Structured Change Management Process
Phase 1 – Prepare for the change
The first phase – the preparation for change – focuses on the following topics:
Clarify objectives for the change in “people” terms and ensure a “compelling case for the
change.”
Assess stakeholders (i.e., those impacted by the change) for their readiness and support.
Obtain necessary resources and organize to manage the change.
Align executive sponsors to build a network (coalition) of sponsors.
Conduct an analysis to define the specific impact of the change on each stakeholder.
Clarify vision and objectives
The beginning of every successful change is a “compelling change story.” This convincing
“shackling story” creates the desire for a future situation. Without this motivation it is hard to
transform a system from state “A” (today) to state Z, which means the target situation.
Assess stakeholders
Stakeholders are any individual or groups of individuals who are impacted by the change or
are critical to the successful implementation of the change. This could be inside or outside of
the organization. To get a better understanding who to focus on you can conduct a stakeholder
assessment and define actions needed to improve the level of support for the most critical
stakeholder groups.
An effective stakeholder management process is composed of four steps, which should be
started by the project manager during project initiation and should be updated regularly
throughout project execution.

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
4/10

Exhibit 7 – Assess Stakeholders
Change impact analysis
The impact analysis reflects the coherences between future events and the impact of the
change concerning the different stakeholder groups. It should be worked out how the
stakeholders can be prepared to the changes.
For each single stakeholder group the effects of a change and the readiness to change should
be analyzed. To conduct a detailed analysis on the specific impact of the change on each
stakeholder the following questions along the A-Z-model should be answered.
What will change in the world of each stakeholder group?
What do the people need to do differently in “Z”?
What do the people need to be able to change?
How do we prepare them for the desired change?
Answering the last question will lead to a detailed change management plan.
Exhibit 8 – A-Z Model to Obtain a Change Management Plan
Align executive sponsors
The greatest success factor for managing the people side of change is active and visible
executive sponsorship throughout the project. The “Executive Sponsor” is a supporter of the
change out of the top management. This person explains the necessity of change and shows
the risks which can appear without the change.
It is important to focus on key required activities for the executive sponsor:
Participate actively and visibly throughout the project.

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
5/10

Clarify the vision for the change and be able to communicate the compelling case for
change in clear understandable terms.
Build a coalition of sponsorship with peers and managers.
Communicate directly with managers and employees (and listen to them).
Ensure adequate resources to achieve and sustain the change.
Manages any resistance at senior levels.
Besides executive sponsors, there is a team of individuals with a vested interest in having the
largest impact of the change – the coalition.
What is meant by sponsorship coalition?
Identified key leaders who will help drive the change
Champions / visible supporters of the change
Often follows the organizational lines of management
Exhibit 9 – Sponsor Coalition Map
Phase 2 – Plan the change
In the second phase, main emphasis is on the development of formal plans (change
management plan) and the integration of those into the overall project management plan. The
defined strategy of the initiation phase must be verified and detailed.
Executive sponsor activities
Communications and training
Resistance management
Events and Interventions
Plan Communications
The main subject of the communication plan is the description of the importance of change
and the risks in case of no change. The messages should be distributed by different medias
/channels and 5-7 times repeated.
When planning the communication concept a project manager should take into account that
He needs to answer the WIIFM question (What is in it for me?).
He needs to adapt to your different audiences (stakeholder groups).
He needs to refer to your change impact analysis (How will you prepare each stakeholder
group).
He needs to identify the key messages.
He should consider the timing as to when it will be best to communicate what.
He should consider the need for communicating the message (5 – 7 times).
He should consider using multiple channels / media for your communication.
He should consider who is the most appropriate “sender.”
Phase 3 – Manage the change
In the third phase main emphasis is on the management of implementation of the change
based on the defined change management plan.
Execute Change Management Plan

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
6/10

Realize actions
Perform change controlling
Manage resistance
Manage resistance
Resistance is natural. Therefore always keep in mind:
Resistance does not reflect that an employee is problematic
Expect resistance
Good change management practices not only reduce resistance, but can turn some of the
most resistant employees into some of the biggest supporters.
Main reasons for resistance at employee level can be seen in the lack of awareness,
perceived negative impact on their current job role, the history of organization's change
failures, the lack of visible support and sponsorship. On the management level the main
resistance issues are lack of awareness and involvement in the change, perceived negative
impact on current job role (e.g., fear of losing control and authority), and workload.
In order to react on that a project manager of a change project needs to take proactive steps
such as:
Provide clear, honest and open two way communications (and listen).
Manage expectations and clarify the personal impact (what specifically will change and
what is expected).
Involve end users (those directly impacted) early and throughout the project.
Engage Managers and supervisors early and establish their role as coaches and change
agents.
Phase 4 – Reinforce and sustain the change
To ensure a sustainable change, the last phase of the structured change management process
deals with the task of reinforcement.
Collect feedback to measure results and the adoption of the desired change.
Take corrective action to close any gaps.
Embed the change into systems, processes and policies, and deliver consequences to
sustain the change.
To be able to measure the desired change you need to establish metrics to track desired
changes /results (or noncompliance). Thereby the desired final status Z should always be used
as the main reference point.
An appropriate integration of desired change into existing systems (such as HR systems,
policies, or scorecard metrics) could support and reduce complexity by not inventing a new
separate approach.
Conclusion: Need for Integrated Change Management and
Organizational Agility
A change has high impact to a company. It could be managed successfully by applying
“integrated change management.” The most important success factor is the involvement of an
active sponsor.
A project manager of a change project should integrate the organizational and the people side
of a change. He should integrate professional change management processes methods, tools
and techniques to his professional project management: 1. Initiate, 2. Plan, 3. Manage, 4.
Reinforce & Sustain a change.
The PMI 2012 Pulse of the Profession In-Depth Report: Organizational Agility (PMI, 2012)
proofs: greater organizational agility leads to better performance—providing organizations with
a powerful edge on the competition.
The probability to run successful strategic initiatives is in agile organizations two times higher
as in companies with low agility.
Hiatt, J. M. (2006). ADKAR: A model for change in business, government and our community.
Loveland, CO: Prosci.
Kotter, J. P., & Rathgeber, H. (2005). Our Iceberg is melting: Changing and succeeding under
any conditions. New York, NY: St. Martin's Press.

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
7/10

Quick Links
Report PDUs ﻿
Online Courses
Kotter, J. P. (1996). Leading change. Boston , MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Kübler-Ross, E. (1969). On death and dying. New York, NY: Touchstone.
Project Management Institute. (2012). PMI's 2012 pulse of the profession in-depth report:
Organizational agility. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute.
Project Management Institute. (2013). A guide to the project management body of knowledge
(PMBOK  Guide) (5th ed.). Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute.
Prosci – Change Management Learning Center. (2012). 2012 edition of best practices in
change management. Loveland, CO: Prosci.
Robbins, S. P. (2003). Organizational behavior (10th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Education.
Schein, E. H. (2004). Organizational culture and leadership (3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Wanner, M. F. (2012, July). Change management – Manage changes, achieve and reinforce
organizational agility. Munich, Germany: Tiba Managementberatung
This material has been reproduced with the permission of the copyright owner. Unauthorized
reproduction of this material is strictly prohibited. For permission to reproduce this material,
please contact PMI or any listed author.
©2013 Markus F. Wanner
Originally published as a part of 2013 PMI Global Congress Proceedings – New Orleans,
Louisiana
®
ADVERTISEMENT
ADVERTISEMENT
ADVERTISEMENT

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
8/10

PMBOK® Guide
Webinars ﻿
Events
Store
Certifications
Project Management Professional
(PMP)®
Certified Associate in Project
Management (CAPM)®
PMI Agile Certified Practitioner (PMI-
ACP)®
Compare Certifications
Membership
Become a Member
Local Chapters
Membership FAQs
Community
Latest from the Community ﻿
Discussions ﻿
Templates ﻿
Blogs ﻿
Volunteering
Partner with PMI
Enterprise and Commercial Partners
Training Partners
Organization
Our Mission & Vision
Our Purpose
Our Leadership
The PMI Blog
What is Project Management?
What is a Project Manager?
Press & Media
Careers
Support
Contact Us
Store Help

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQmh…
9/10

Stay Connected
© 2025 Project Management Institute, Inc.
Accessibility
Privacy
Sitemap
Terms of use
Purchasing Terms
Advertising & Sponsorship

Feedback
15/10/2025, 08:53
Integrated Change Management | PMI
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/integrated-change-management-5954?_gl=1*1jeiqh0*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NTkyOTY3OTkuQ2p3S0NBandfLTNHQm…
10/10
